Editorial
Fatigue in rheumatoid arthritis
Fatigue is a common symptom in many rheumatic dis-
eases, including RA. However, until recently healthcareprofessionals and researchers had not recognized its clin-
ical significance and its impact on patients’ lives. A turning
point came in 2002, at the Patient Perspective Workshopof the OMERACT meeting, when patients highlighted the
importance of fatigue [1]. This led to the recommendation
by OMERACT in 2006 that fatigue is included as a coreoutcome measure in clinical trials of RA treatments [2].
The process by which the rheumatology community has
come to recognize and focus on fatigue is an example ofthe value of patient involvement in setting research prio-rities. This awareness of fatigue as a patient priority has
led many researchers over the last decade to work on
better understanding the causes, assessment and man-agement of fatigue.
Qualitative research has provided insight into the nature
of RA-related fatigue. Patients have described it as a com-plex and multidimensional symptom that can be over-
whelming, unearned and unpredictable [3]. It can include
physical fatigue (e.g. levels of physical energy), cognitivefatigue (e.g. concentration and clarity of thought), living
with fatigue (e.g. ability to carry out activities of daily
living and social activities) and emotional fatigue (e.g. feel-ings of distress or upset) [4]. Quantitative research hasestablished that fatigue is highly prevalent in RA, with
levels similar to those in chronic fatigue syndrome [5].
In relation to impact, fatigue has been identified as the
consequence of RA that best differentiates between levels
of health-related quality of life [6]. Patients have reported
the negative effects of fatigue on their well-being, physicalactivities, emotions, mood, relationships, and social and
family roles. From a societal perspective, fatigue is a sig-
nificant predictor of high health care costs, and is the mainreason for work disability and loss [7]. The detrimental
effects of fatigue are exacerbated by patients’ percep-
tions that the symptom is a challenge to manage andthat it is not routinely addressed in clinical practice. Thisreluctance to discuss fatigue may reflect the lack of infor-
mation and available treatments. Consequently, fatigue is
widely recognized as important to patients, but how tomanage and improve the symptom remains a major
unmet need.
A challenge in providing support for RA-related fatigue
is that the causes are still unknown. Cross-sectional stu-
dies have found that fatigue is associated with pain se-
verity and psychosocial factors including depression, butnot disease activity [8]. Overall, the current evidence sug-gests that fatigue is likely to be caused and maintained by
the complex interaction of clinical factors (e.g. inflamma-
tion, pain and disability), psychosocial issues (e.g. coping,mood, beliefs and behaviours) and personal factors (e.g.working, caring responsibilities and comorbidities) that
may vary both between and within individuals over time[9]. This is reflected in evidence from systematic reviews
of non-pharmacological and pharmacological treatments
for fatigue, which have identified the potential benefit ofphysical activity, psychosocial interventions and some
biologic DMARDs [10, 11]. The beneficial effect of biologic
DMARDs suggests that inflammation has a significantpathobiological role, although fatigue does not completely
resolve. Experimental models have found that systemic
inflammation leads to increase in intracerebral IFN andTNF- aactivity [12]. Furthermore, in collagen-induced arth-
ritis, an animal-model of RA, the blood /C150brain barrier is
porous to cytokines [13]. In patients with RA, a magnetic
resonance spectroscopy study suggested that systemicinflammation may affect the neurochemical status of the
CNS with high levels of choline to creatine ratio [14].
Possibly due to the lack of clarity around causal path-
ways, there is an increasing focus on the self-manage-
ment of fatigue rather than the resolution or cure of the
symptom. Recent evidence includes a multicentrerandomized control trial using cognitive behavioural
approaches. This study found that the impact of fatigue
was reduced, with the positive effects maintained at 2years [15]. Self-management interventions are typicallyhypothesized to work through the therapeutic mechan-
isms of enhancing patients’ self-efficacy (the belief in
their ability to achieve a desired outcome or goal). Thisis achieved by addressing patients’ illness beliefs, their
coping strategies and their acceptance of fatigue as a
symptom of their RA. In this study, the interventionincluded the use of daily activity diaries and goal-setting
to promote a shift in beliefs and progressive adaptations
in how patients cope with fatigue, leading to betterknowledge, confidence and reactivation in everyday
activities.
Measurement is key to evaluating the usefulness of fa-
tigue interventions, whether the focus is on reducing se-verity or managing the impact of the symptom. Although
OMERACT included fatigue as a core outcome measure in
RA, the lack of an RA-specific validated outcome measureled to researchers adopting instruments developed for
other conditions to assess fatigue. However, this was
resolved in 2013 with the development, testing and pub-lication of the Bristol Rheumatoid Arthritis Fatigue Scale
[16]. Designed in collaboration with patients, this multi-di-
mensional measure captures physical, cognitive, emo-tional and social aspects of fatigue. In addition, threenumerical ratings scales enable researchers and health-
care professionals to measure fatigue severity, impact
and coping. As the factors driving and maintaining RA-related fatigue are likely to vary between patients, insight
!The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the British Society for Rheumatology.
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.or g/licenses/by-nc/4.0/), which permits non-commercial re-use,
distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permis sions@oup.comRHEUMATOLOGYRheumatology 2019;58:v1 /C150v2
doi:10.1093/rheumatology/kez314
EDITORIALDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/rheumatology/article/58/Supplement_5/v1/5611828 by guest on 07 November 2023
into how individuals experience and perceive their fatigue
could be an important step in providing tailored support.
Patients have identified fatigue as a priority and a chal-
lenge to manage. In this supplement, authors have pro-vided updates on the pathobiology, clinical assessment
and management of fatigue. Clarifying our current under-
standing and identifying the gaps in our knowledge is animportant step as we continue to look at ways of support-
ing patients with this common and difficult symptom.
Funding : This supplement is supported by a grant from
Gilead Sciences, Inc.
Disclosure statement : E.D. has no conflict of interest to
declare. E.H.C. has received research grants and/or
served as member of advisory boards and speakerbureaus of Abbvie, Allergan, Amgen, AstraZeneca, Bio-Cancer, Biogen, Bristol Myers Squibb, Boehringer
Ingelheim, Celgene, Chugai Pharma, Daiichi Sankyo, Eli
Lilly, Ferring Pharmaceutical, GSK, Hospira, ISIS Pharma,Jazz Pharmaceuticals, Janssen, MedImmune, Merrimack
Pharmaceutical, Merck & Co, Napp, Novimmune,
Novartis, ObsEva, Pfizer, Regeneron, Roche, R-Pharm,Sanofi, SynAct Pharma, Synovate, Tonix and UCB.
Ernest H. Choy1and Emma Dures2
1CREATE Centre, Section of Rheumatology, Division of
Infection and Immunity, Cardiff University, Cardiff and2Centre
for Health and Clinical Research, University of the West of
England, Bristol and Academic Rheumatology, Bristol Royal
Infirmary, Bristol, UKAccepted 28 June 2019
Correspondence to: Ernest H. Choy, CREATE Centre, Section
of Rheumatology, Division of Infection and Immunity, CardiffUniversity School of Medicine, Cardiff University, CardiffCF14 4XN, UK. E-mail: choyeh@cardiff.ac.uk
References
1 Kirwan J, Heiberg T, Hewlett S. Outcomes from the patient
perspective workshop at OMERACT 6. J Rheumatol2003;30:868 /C15072.
2 Kirwan JR, Minnock P, Adebajo A et al. Patient perspec-
tive: fatigue as a recommended patient centered outcome
measure in rheumatoid arthritis. J Rheumatol2007;34:1174 /C1507.
3 Hewlett S, Cockshott Z, Byron M et al. Patients’ percep-
tions of fatigue in rheumatoid arthritis: overwhelming, un-controllable, ignored. Arthritis Rheum 2005;53:697 /C150702.4 Nicklin J, Cramp F, Kirwan J, Urban M, Hewlett S.
Collaboration with patients in the design of patient-re-
ported outcome measures: capturing the experience of
fatigue in rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Care Res
(Hoboken) 2010;62:1552 /C1508.
5 van Hoogmoed D, Fransen J, Bleijenberg G, van Riel P.
Physical and psychosocial correlates of severe fatigue in
rheumatoid arthritis. Rheumatology (Oxford)2010;49:1294 /C150302.
6 Rupp I, Boshuizen HC, Jacobi CE, Dinant HJ, van den Bos
GA. Impact of fatigue on health-related quality of life in
rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Rheum 2004;51:578 /C15085.
7 Lacaille D, White MA, Backman CL, Gignac MA. Problems
faced at work due to inflammatory arthritis: new insights
gained from understanding patients’ perspective. Arthritis
Rheum 2007;57:1269 /C15079.
8 Pollard LC, Choy EH, Gonzalez J, Khoshaba B, Scott DL.
Fatigue in rheumatoid arthritis reflects pain, not disease
activity. Rheumatology (Oxford) 2006;45:885 /C1509.
9 Hewlett S, Chalder T, Choy E et al. Fatigue in rheumatoid
arthritis: time for a conceptual model. Rheumatology
(Oxford) 2011;50:1004 /C1506.
10 Almeida C, Choy EH, Hewlett S et al. Biologic interven-
tions for fatigue in rheumatoid arthritis. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev 2016;6:Cd008334.
11 Cramp F, Hewlett S, Almeida C et al. Non-pharmaco-
logical interventions for fatigue in rheumatoid arthritis.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2013;8:Cd008322.
12 Thomson CA, McColl A, Cavanagh J, Graham GJ.
Peripheral inflammation is associated with remote global
gene expression changes in the brain.
J Neuroinflammation 2014;11:73.
13 Nishioku T, Furusho K, Tomita A et al. Potential role for
S100A4 in the disruption of the blood-brain barrier in col-
lagen-induced arthritic mice, an animal model of
rheumatoid arthritis. Neuroscience 2011;189:286 /C15092.
14 Emmer BJ, van der Bijl AE, Huizinga TW et al. Brain in-
volvement in rheumatoid arthritis: a magnetic resonance
spectroscopy study. Arthritis Rheum 2009;60:3190 /C1505.
15 Hewlett S, Almeida C, Ambler N et al. Reducing arthritis
fatigue impact: two-year randomised controlled trial of
cognitive behavioural approaches by rheumatology teams
(RAFT). Ann Rheum Dis 2019;78:465.
16 Nicklin J, Cramp F, Kirwan J et al. Measuring fatigue in
rheumatoid arthritis: a cross-sectional study to evaluate
the Bristol Rheumatoid Arthritis Fatigue Multi-Dimensional
questionnaire, visual analog scales, and numerical ratingscales. Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken) 2010;62:1559 /C15068.
v2 https://academic.oup.com/rheumatologyEditorialDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/rheumatology/article/58/Supplement_5/v1/5611828 by guest on 07 November 2023


 This is the end of the 19 text 

