Fatigue in rheumatoid arthritis: 
from patient experience to measurement
Stephanie Nikolaus
Fatigue in rheumatoid arthritis: from patient experience to measurement   Stephanie NikolausUITNODIGING
Graag nodig ik u uit voor het 
bijwonen  van de openbare
verdediging van mijn proefschrift:
Fatigue in rheumatoid arthritis: 
from patient experience to 
measurement
Vrijdag 16 maart 2012 om 14.30 uur.
Universiteit Twente, 
gebouw de Waaier, 
Prof.dr. G. Berkhoff-zaal, 
Drienerlolaan 5, Enschede. 
Na afloop van de promotie bent 
u van harte welkom op de 
receptie ter plaatse.
Stephanie Nikolaus
s.nikolaus@utwente.nl
053 4896063
Paranimfen
Christina Pawliczek
cpawliczek@ukaachen.de
Kathrin Fuchs
chatrina21@yahoo.de  
 
 
 
 
Fatigue in rheumatoid arthritis: 
from patient experience to measurement  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Stephanie Nikolaus 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Thesis, University of Twente, 2012 
ISBN/EAN 9789461082763 
© Stephanie Nikolaus 
 
Lay-out and printed by Gildeprint Drukkerijen, Ensc hede, the Netherlands  
 
The studies presented in this thesis were performed  at the department of Psychology, 
Health & Technology of the University of Twente (En schede) and the Arthritis Center 
Twente at Medisch Spectrum Twente hospital (Ensched e) and the hospitals of 
“Ziekenhuisgroep Twente” (Almelo and Hengelo), the Netherlands. The rheumatology 
research program of PHT is financially supported by  the Dutch Arthritis Foundation 
(Reumafonds). 
This project is financially supported by Stichting Reumaonderzoek Twente and the 
Institute of Behavioural Research.  
Publication of this thesis was financially supporte d by the Dutch Arthritis Foundation 
(Reumafonds). 
 
 
   
 
FATIGUE IN RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS: 
FROM PATIENT EXPERIENCE TO MEASUREMENT  
 
 
 
 
PROEFSCHRIFT 
 
 
 
ter verkrijging van 
 de graad van doctor aan de Universiteit Twente,  
op gezag van de rector magnificus,  
prof.dr. H. Brinksma,  
volgens besluit van het College voor Promoties 
 in het openbaar te verdedigen  
op vrijdag 16 maart 2012 om 14.45 uur 
 
 
door 
 
 
Stephanie Nikolaus 
geboren op 2 november 1980  
te Kleef, Duitsland 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dit proefschrift is goedgekeurd door de promotor Pr of. dr. M.A.F.J. van de Laar en 
assistent-promotoren Dr. C. Bode en Dr. E. Taal.   Samenstelling promotiecommissie: 
 
 
Promotor:  Prof. dr. M.A.F.J. van de Laar  
 
 
Assistent-promotoren: Dr. C. Bode 
   Dr. E. Taal  
 
 
Leden:    Prof. dr. E.T. Bohlmeijer (University of Twente) 
Prof. dr. J. Dekker (Free University Amsterdam) 
Prof. dr. R. Geenen (University Utrecht) 
Prof. dr. C.A.W. Glas (University of Twente)  
Prof. dr. S. Hewlett (University of West England, B ristol UK) 
Prof. dr. P.L.C.M. van Riel (Radboud University, Ni jmegen) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Contents 
 
 
Chapter 1 General introduction      9 
 
Chapter 2 Fatigue and factors related to fatigue in  rheumatoid    
arthritis: a systematic review     21 
  
Chapter 3  Measuring fatigue in rheumatoid arthriti s    69 
 
Chapter 4 New insights into the experience of fatig ue among  
patients with rheumatoid arthritis: a qualitative s tudy   75 
 
Chapter 5 Four different patterns of fatigue in rhe umatoid  
arthritis patients: results of a Q-sort study    89  
 
Chapter 6 Selection of items for a computer-adaptiv e test to    
measure fatigue in patients with rheumatoid  
arthritis: a Delphi approach    115 
 
Chapter 7 Which dimensions of fatigue should be mea sured in     
patients with rheumatoid arthritis? A Delphi study  137 
 
Chapter 8 Expert’s evaluations of fatigue questionn aires used in    
rheumatoid arthritis – A Delphi study among patient s,  
nurses and rheumatologists in the Netherlands  149 
 
Chapter 9 Calibration of a multidimensional item ba nk to measure   
fatigue in rheumatoid arthritis patients    163 
 
Chapter 10 Summary and general discussion     197 
   
Summary in Dutch (Samenvatting)    207 
  Acknowledgements (Dankwoord)    215 
  Curriculum vitae       219 
  List of publications     221 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
9  
 
 
 
 
Chapter 1 
 
 
 
General introduction 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 10 When you enter the term “human fatigue” into Google  approximately 131.000.000 hits 
emerge within 0.17 seconds. This enormous amount of  information indicates that fatigue 
is a topic that has considerable relevance for peop le. Basically, being tired is nothing to 
worry about. Everybody knows it as signal that body  and mind need sleep or relaxation for 
recovery. Usually fatigue diminishes after taking a dequate rest, body and mind are 
refreshed again. The Oxford dictionary defines fati gue as “a feeling of being extremely 
tired, usually because of hard work or exercise”. 1 However, for most persons with a 
chronic somatic condition such as rheumatoid arthri tis (RA), the situation is different.   
 
Aim of this thesis was to explore how fatigue is ex perienced in patients with RA as only 
very little is known about this phenomenon. Further more it was investigated how fatigue 
in RA can be measured adequately. The topic is thus  twofold; meaning and measurement 
of fatigue in RA. 
 
 
Rheumatoid arthritis and the experience of fatigue 
RA is a chronic auto-immune disease that is charact erized by inflammation of the joints. 2 
Typical symptoms are pain, tender and swollen joint s, stiffness, functional limitations and 
fatigue. Between 40% and 80% of the patients report  substantial fatigue. 3-8 In fact, they 
mention fatigue as one of their most bothersome pro blems with RA. 9 Patients describe 
their fatigue as annoying, multidimensional symptom  with far-reaching consequences for 
daily life. 10-13  It is different from usual fatigue or tiredness be cause it is more extreme and 
no longer earned what makes it unpredictable. Thus general descriptions and lay 
knowledge do not reflect the experience of patients  with RA. Consequently, a different 
definition of fatigue is needed than for healthy pe ople. However, an internationally 
accepted definition of fatigue in RA does not exist . 14  We do not yet know for sure whether 
there are differences between RA fatigue and fatigu e in other somatic diseases. According 
to Hewlett there are similar multidimensional compo nents and consequences of fatigue 
but the diseases differ significantly with regard t o the attribution and interpretation of 
fatigue. 11  In cancer for example, fatigue is attributed to ch emotherapy and therefore can 
be predicted and prepared for. 15  In MS, fatigue is perceived as exacerbating existi ng 
symptoms, whereas in RA existing symptoms are perce ived to exacerbate fatigue. 16  Based 
on these differences we might conclude that a defin ition of fatigue in RA seems necessary 
and useful. 
A definition without referring to previous activity  is provided by Dittner et al. 17  They state 
that fatigue is an essentially subjective experienc e that can be described as “extreme and 
persistent tiredness, weakness or exhaustion—mental , physical or both”. 17  In our  
11 interview study 13  that is reported in chapter 4, a woman described h er experience of 
fatigue as follows:  
 
“Yes, well you feel like you’re carrying a load of flour on your back.  
That’s what it feels like, that there’s always some thing weighing your  
shoulders down, that you’ve got to lug that around with you.” 
(female patient with RA, 58 years old) 
 
Although this quotation is representative for many persons with RA, not all of them 
experience fatigue in the same way. Nearly all pati ents mentioned a negative impact of 
fatigue on their lives, 13  but the severity varied. The quotation  
 
“I think that if I hadn’t been so tired, I would re ally have liked to  
have had children, but it’s not possible. So, yes, the tiredness does  
stand in the way of a lot of things. My relationshi p, too. I think the  
tiredness is also the reason why that didn’t work o ut.”  
(female patient with RA, 39 years old) 
 
reflects a more serious impact than the following:  
 
“I know that it [the fatigue] will pass quickly, so  I’m not too 
 bothered about it. And sometimes I think it might have  
to do with getting older.” 
(male patient with RA, 68 years old) 
 
The causes for such inter-individual differences in  fatigue among patients with RA are not 
yet fully understood. The same applies to intra-ind ividual differences as variations in 
severity, frequency and duration of fatigue. A part icipant of the interview study 13  stated: 
 
“It is very variable, the fatigue. At one time you have more energy 
 than the other time but the energy will never be e nough.  
The causes are not always clear, why you have more energy  
at one moment than at another.”  
(female patient with RA, 39 years old) 
 
 
 12 The perspective of patients  
Most patients try to manage their fatigue by trial and error and report to receive no 
adequate medical or para-medical support.18  The perception of patients regarding RA 
outcomes and their health state often differs from those of physicians and other health 
care providers, so it is of special importance to i nclude the patients´ perspective in clinical 
care and research. 19  The limited attention that fatigue gets from clini cians might be 
explained by the complexity of the phenomenon, the lack of knowledge about its origins 
and the absence of treatment options. Furthermore i t is not immediately clear what a 
patient means when he or she talks about fatigue. T he lay use of the word “fatigue” lacks 
a clear meaning and can refer to different manifest ations as exhaustion, muscle weakness, 
lack of energy, depletion of resources, apathy or d epression.20  Moreover, patients often 
use cues instead of talking about fatigue directly.21  The perspective of patients is so 
important because fatigue is basically a subjective  experience. It is not possible to gain 
knowledge about fatigue in RA without asking it to a patient; self-report is essential. This is 
vividly demonstrated in the following quotation fro m interview material: 13   
 
“Acceptation is the most difficult thing with fatig ue; you have constantly 
to slow down. And that is fatiguing too. You cannot  make clear to another person  
how it feels. A broken finger you can point at and explain that you have pain.  
That is visible and other people believe you. But w hen you say that you are tired,  
it is difficult to understand because it is not so easy to display. That makes me thinking: 
Well, I better do not tell them. When you take the whole package then the fatigue  
is the most annoying. You can bear down pain and yo u can talk about it  
more easily. But fatigue, that is not tangible.”  
(female patient with RA, 65 years old) 
 
About ten years ago, the issue of fatigue was raise d by patients themselves on OMERACT 
meetings (international group of experts on outcome  measures in rheumatology) and 
thoroughly discussed. 22  Thereupon, fatigue was recommended to be included in the core 
set of outcome variables in clinical trials. 23   
 
The challenge in the assessment of fatigue is that there is no objective way to measure it. 
Research on fatigue will therefore always be indisp ensably connected to the perspective 
of the patient. 24  Measurement of fatigue is also related to the inte rpretation of words 
used in questionnaires. Cultural and linguistic asp ects should be taken into account when 
differences between populations are intended to be examined. 25    
13 A precondition for internationally useable measurem ent instruments is that the 
experience of fatigue is comparable in different co untries. The cross-cultural meaning of 
fatigue in patients with RA seems to be relatively uniform since interview studies on the 
experience of fatigue in the United States, the Uni ted Kingdom and the Netherlands 
revealed largely overlapping results. 10-13  However, it is not yet known how fatigue is 
experienced by patients with RA in non-western coun tries. The previously mentioned 
studies were conducted in relative similar cultural  environments. It is of special 
importance to conduct research in different countri es to find out more about the causes 
and impact of fatigue.  
 
Multicausality and impact of fatigue 
Knowledge about the mechanisms of fatigue in RA is still lacking. It is often assumed that 
levels of fatigue are highly associated with inflam matory processes. Anyway, conflicting 
evidence exists about the relation between fatigue and inflammatory markers of RA, 26  and 
fatigue turned out to be relatively stable over tim e, 27-30  also in phases of remission. 
Modern medical treatment has hardly beneficial impa ct on fatigue in RA, 31  as discussed in 
chapter 3 of this thesis. 32  Hewlett et al. 33  proposed a conceptual model reflecting 
interactions between disease processes (RA dimensio n), thoughts, feelings and behaviours 
(cognitive/ behavioural dimension) and personal iss ues in the life of a patient (personal 
dimension). However, a theoretically supported mode l, explaining the multicausal 
pathways of fatigue does not yet exist. To gain an overview about various factors 
associated with fatigue, the available scientific k nowledge and empirical results were 
summarized in a systematic review. This review is d escribed in chapter 2. 34   
 
Medical treatment for fatigue in RA, as described i n chapter 3, indicate a relation between 
fatigue and inflammatory processes. In contrast, bi opsychosocial models also include 
psychological and social aspects. We do not yet kno w which pathways are important for 
fatigue in RA. By conducting the systematic review (chapter 2), we intended to broaden 
the view from inflammatory markers to other aspects  that are possibly related to fatigue. 
Fatigue is not only an annoying symptom for patient s; it has relevance for society either. 
The societal impact of fatigue in RA becomes clear when examining the rates of work 
disability and its drivers. Fatigue turned out to b e related to the work ability of employees 
with RA. 35  Work absenteeism in combination with the functiona l restrictions associated 
with the disease can lead to early retirement or wo rk disability. Fatigue is also associated 
with participation restrictions in patients with RA ; 36  they were impeded in social activities 
or hobbies by fatigue. Its impact can affect all ar eas of a patient’s life but it is not yet 14 possible to provide an overview about statistically  supported causes and consequences of 
fatigue in RA. Therefore it is of special importanc e to measure fatigue adequately.    
 
Measurement of fatigue 
The precise measurement of fatigue is essential for  the evaluation of potential treatment 
effects. 37  It is also important for getting insight into caus es and consequences of fatigue. 
Moreover, adequate measurement of fatigue is needed  for diagnosis and screening 
purposes and facilitates the communication about fa tigue between patient and 
professional.   
Several uni- and multidimensional scales were devel oped to assess fatigue in clinical 
practice and research. Whereas unidimensional quest ionnaires are usually brief and 
provide a single score, multidimensional scales com prise a larger number of items and 
provide more detailed information that can give ins ight into different profiles and 
underlying mechanisms of fatigue. 17  
Fatigue measures with single item scales, such as v isual analogue scales (VAS) or 
numerical rating scales (NRS), might have some valu e, 38  but do not correspond with the 
multidimensional character of fatigue as reported b y patients. 10-13  In line with patients’ 
experiences measurement of fatigue should be multid imensional, although it is not yet 
clear which and how many dimensions should be asses sed.  
Of the four multi-item fatigue questionnaires with reasonable evidence for validity in RA, 14  
only the Multidimensional Assessment of Fatigue sca le (MAF) 39  comprises several 
dimensions: severity, distress, timing and interfer ence. For the Functional Assessment of 
Chronic Illness Therapy Fatigue Scale (FACIT-F), 40  separate scores for experience and 
impact can be calculated although it is usually app lied unidimensionally. Also the Short 
Form 36 subscale vitality (SF-36) 41  and the Profile of Mood States subscale fatigue/in ertia 
(POMS) 42  only have one dimension. Nicklin et al. 43  demonstrated that none of these four 
scales covers patient-reported concepts of fatigue comprehensively. Patients described 
fatigue in terms of frequency, duration, energy, sl eep, cognition, coping, emotion, impact, 
social life, planning, relationships, and quality o f life. 11,43  Moreover, none of these four 
instruments met all criteria for validity in patien ts with RA, so still further validation in this 
patient group is needed. 14  The main problem concerned content validity; a lim itation of 
these traditional instruments is that the perspecti ve of RA patients was not included 
during their development. In chapter 8, we describe  how the items from traditional 
fatigue questionnaires are evaluated by patients, r heumatologists and nurses. 44  
Recently, the Bristol RA Fatigue Multi-Dimensional Questionnaire (BRAF-MDQ) 45  was 
developed from the patient’s perspective and evalua ted in a British RA population. With 
its four dimensions (physical, living, cognition, e motion), a score for each can be  
15 calculated. The BRAF-MDQ is a promising instrument as it is based on the perspective of 
patients. However it is, even so as the other menti oned fatigue scales, a fixed-length 
questionnaire, meaning that each patient has to fil l in the same items in the same order. 
This has the disadvantage that patients might be co nfronted with questions that do not 
apply to their individual level of fatigue.  
In contrast, computerized adaptive testing (CAT) pr ovides the possibility to measure 
patient reported outcomes with few items. 46  Items are respectively selected from an item 
bank based on a patient’s previous answer so that p recise measurement at individual level 
with few items becomes possible. 47  For the computerized selection of the best matchin g 
items, a large item pool is needed that contains mo re items than are presented to a 
patient. Before a computer-adaptive test (CAT) can be developed, such an item pool has 
to be scaled according to item response theory (IRT ). With IRT, item parameters as the 
difficulty level can be assessed for each item inde pendently. 47  This information is required 
to ideally match the items to the patient’s individ ual level and for inter-individual 
comparisons on the measured construct even if patie nts filled in different items. Primarily, 
CATs were used for ability and achievement testing,  but the interest in computerized 
adaptive testing for health-related measures is gro wing. 48  In this thesis, the steps to 
develop a calibrated item bank for the consecutive construction of a computerized 
adaptive test (CAT) are described (chapter 4-9).  
 
Structure of this thesis 
The first study that is presented in this thesis gi ves an overview of the available scientific 
knowledge about factors that are associated with fa tigue in form of a systematic review 
(chapter 2). In the following chapter, the relevanc e of precise measurement of fatigue for 
the evaluation of potential treatment effects is di scussed. 
To gain more insight in the experience of fatigue f rom the patients´ perspective in depth-
interviews were held with RA patients. This intervi ew study is reported in chapter 4.  After 
conducting this interview study we executed a Q-sor t study to find out whether there are 
certain groups of patients who have a common perspe ctive on the experience of fatigue 
(chapter 5). 49  Based on these two studies, and already existing f atigue questionnaires, we 
constructed a preliminary item pool for a comprehen sive measurement. For the 
development of content valid items, it is essential  to include the experience of patients 
and professionals in the field. 50,51  Only patients can report on the subjective experie nce of 
fatigue while clinicians have the most experience w ith the outward manifestation of 
fatigue. 52  Therefore in a Delphi study an expert panel of pat ients, rheumatologists and 
nurses evaluated the preliminary item pool as repor ted in chapters 6-8. 53,54,44  Result was a 
qualitatively evaluated item pool consisting of 245  items spread among 12 dimensions of 16 fatigue. In order to construct an item pool for the  CAT fatigue in RA, its dimensionality 
structure was examined by factor analyses and the i tem pool was calibrated according to 
item response theory (IRT) (chapter 9). 55  
Finally, the thesis provides insights into meaning and measurement of fatigue in RA. First, 
an overview about factors related to fatigue and th e impact of fatigue was provided in 
form of a systematic review. Then the meaning of fa tigue for individual patients as well as 
groups of patients was investigated. The final prod uct of the thesis is an initially calibrated 
item pool for the comprehensive and patient-friendl y measurement of fatigue in RA. In its 
development the patients’ perspective and modern ps ychometrics were combined to 
form the basis for the construction of a CAT fatigu e in RA in a consecutive project.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
17 REFERENCES 
 
1. Hornby AS, Wehmeier S, McIntosh C, Turnbull J, A shy M, eds. Oxford Advanced 
Learner’s Dictionary. Oxford University Press, 2007 :559. 
2. Kvien TK, Scherer HU, Burmester G-H. Rheumatoid arthritis. In: Bijlsma JWJ ed. EULAR 
compendium on rheumatic diseases. London: BMJ Publi shing Group and European League 
Against Rheumatism,2009:61-80.  
3. Belza BL, Henke CJ, Yelin EH, Epstein WV, Gillis s CL. Correlates of fatigue in older adults 
with rheumatoid arthritis. Nurs Res 1993;42:93–9. 
4. Wolfe F, Hawley DJ, Wilson K. The prevalence and  meaning of fatigue in rheumatic 
disease. J Rheumatol 1996;23:1407-1417. 
5. Katz PP. The stresses of rheumatoid arthritis: A ppraisals of perceived impact and coping 
efficacy. Arthritis Care Res 1998;11:9-22. 
6. Pollard LC, Choy EH, Gonzalez J, Koshaba B, Scot t DL. Fatigue in rheumatoid arthritis 
reflects pain, not disease activity. Rheumatology 2 006;45:885-889. 
7. Repping-Wuts H, Fransen J, van Achterberg T, Ble ijenberg G, van Riel P. Persistent 
severe fatigue in patients with rheumatoid arthriti s. J Clinical Nurs 2007;16:377-383. 
8. Van Hoogmoed D, Fransen J, Bleijenberg G, van Ri el P. Physical and psychosocial 
correlates of severe fatigue in rheumatoid arthriti s. Rheumatology 2010;49:1294-1302. 
9. Hewlett S, Carr M, Ryan S, Kirwan J, Richards P,  Carr A, et al. Outcomes generated by 
patients with rheumatoid arthritis: how important a re they? Musculoskel Care 
2005;3:131–42.  
10. Belza Tack B. Fatigue in rheumatoid arthritis. Conditions, strategies, and 
consequences. Arthritis Care Res 1990;3:65–70.  
11. Hewlett S, Cockshott Z, Byron M, Kitchen K, Tip ler S, Pope D, et al. Patients’ 
perceptions of fatigue in rheumatoid arthritis: Ove rwhelming, uncontrollable, ignored. 
Arthritis Care Res 2005;53:697–702.  
12. Repping-Wuts H, Uitterhoeve R, van Riel P, van Achterberg T. Fatigue as experienced 
by patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA): A quali tative study. Int J Nurs Stud 
2008;45:995–1002.  
13. Nikolaus S, Bode C, Taal E, van de Laar MAFJ. N ew insights into the experience of 
fatigue among patients with rheumatoid arthritis: A  qualitative study. Ann Rheum Dis 
2010;69:895–897.  
14. Hewlett S, Hehir M, Kirwan JR. Measuring fatigu e in rheumatoid arthritis: A systematic 
review of scales in use. Arthritis Rheum 2007;57:42 9–439.  
15. Magnusson K, Moller A, Ekman T, Wallgren A. A q ualitative study to explore the 
experience of fatigue in cancer patients. Eur J Can cer Care 1999;8:224-232. 18 16. Flesner G, Ek AC, Söderhamn, O. Lived experienc e of MS-related fatigue – a 
phenomenological interview study. Int J Nurs Stud 2 003;40:707-717. 
17. Dittner AJ, Wessely SC, Brown RG. The assessmen t of fatigue. A practical guide for 
clinicians and researchers. J Psychosom Res 2004;56 :157–170. 
18. Repping-Wuts H, van Riel P, van Achterberg T. F atigue in patients with rheumatoid 
arthritis: what is known and what is needed. Rheuma tology 2009;48:207-209. 
19. Heller JE, Shadick NA. Outcomes in rheumatoid a rthritis: incorporating the patient 
perspective. Curr Opin Rheumatol 2007;19:101-105. 
20. Dupond J.-L. Fatigue in patients with rheumatic  diseases. Joint Bone Spine 
2011;78:156-160. 
21. Repping-Wuts H, Repping T, van Riel P, van Acht erberg T. Fatigue communication at 
the out-patient clinic of rheumatology. Patient Edu c Couns 2008;76:57-62. 
22. De Wit, M. From orphan outcome to darling pet –  patient participation at OMERACT 
and the emergence of fatigue as an important outcom e for research. Ann Rheum Dis 
2010;69(Suppl3):23. 
23. Kirwan J, Minnock P, Adebajo A, Bresnihan B, Ch oy E, de Wit M, et al. Patient 
perspective: fatigue as a recommended patient-centr ed outcome measure in rheumatoid 
arthritis. J Rheumatol 2007;34:1174-7. 
24. DeLuca J ed. Fatigue as a window to the brain. Issues in clinical and cognitive 
neuropsychology. Jordam Grafman, series editor; 200 5.  
25. Lewis G, Wessely S. The epidemiology of fatigue : more questions than answers. J of 
Epidemiol Community Health 1992;46:92-97. 
26. Stebbings S, Treharne GJ. Fatigue in rheumatic disease: an overview. Int J Clin 
Rheumatol 2010;5:487-502. 
27. Belza BL. Comparison of self-reported fatigue i n rheumatoid arthritis and controls. J 
Rheumatol 1995;22:639-643. 
28. Stone AA, Broderick JE, Porter LS, Kaell AT. Th e experience of rheumatoid arthritis pain 
and fatigue: examining momentary reports and correl ates over one week. Arthritis Care 
Res 1997;10:185-193. 
29. Mancuso CA, Rincon M, Sayles W, Paget SA. Psych osocial variables and fatigue: A 
longitudinal study comparing individuals with rheum atoid arthritis and healthy controls. J 
Rheumatol 2006;33:1496-1502. 
30. Treharne GJ, Lyons AC, Hale ED, Goodchild CE, B ooth DA, Kitas GD. Predictors of 
fatigue over 1 year among people with rheumatoid ar thritis. Psychol Health Med 
2008;13:494-504.  
19 31. Chauffier K, Salliot C, Berenbaum F, Sellam J. Effect of biotherapies on fatigue in 
rheumatoid arthritis: a systematic review of the li terature and meta-analysis. 
Rheumatology (Oxford) 2012;51:60-68. 
32. Nikolaus S, van de Laar MAFJ. Measuring fatigue  in rheumatoid arthritis. Nat Rev 
Rheumatol 2011;7:562-4. 
33. Hewlett S, Chalder T, Choy E, Cramp F, Davis B,  Dures E, et al. Fatigue in rheumatoid 
arthritis: time for a conceptual model. Rheumatolog y 2011;50(6):1004-1006.  
34. Nikolaus S, Bode C, Taal E, vd Laar MAFJ (in pr eparation for submission). Fatigue and 
factors related to fatigue in rheumatoid arhritis: a systematic review.  
35. De Croon EM, Sluiter JK, Nijssen TF, Kammeijer M, Dijkmans BA, Lankhorst GJ et al. 
Work ability of Dutch employees with rheumatoid art hritis. Scand J Rheumatol 2005;34(4): 
277-283. 
36. Taal E, Hagens P, Braakman-Jansen L, van de Laa r MAFJ. Perceived restrictions in 
participation in life situations among patients wit h rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Rheum 
2009;60(Suppl10):2080.  
37. Hewlett S, Dures E, Almeida C. Measures of Fati gue. Arthritis Care Res 2011; 
63(S11):S263-S286. 
38. Minnock P, Kirwan J, Bresnihan B. Fatigue is a reliable, sensitive and unique outcome 
measure in rheumatoid arthritis. Rheumatology 2009; 48:1533-1536. 
39. Belza Tack B. Dimensions and correlates of fati gue in older adults with rheumatoid 
arthritis. Dissertation, University of California; 1991.  
40. Cella D, Lai JS, Stone A. Self-reported fatigue : one dimension or more? Lessons from 
the Functional Assessment of Chronic Illness Therap y Fatigue (FACIT-F) questionnaire. 
Support Cancer Care 2011;19:1441-50. 
41. Ware JE Jr, Sherbourne CD. The MOS 36-Item Shor t-Form Health Survey (SF-36). I. 
Conceptual framework and item selection. Med Care 1 992;30:473-483. 
42. McNair D, Lorr M, Droppelman L. Profile of Mood  States manual. New York: Multi-
health Systems Inc; 1992. 
43. Nicklin J, Cramp F, Kirwan J, Urban M, Hewlett S. Collaboration with patients in the 
design of patient reported outcome measures: Captur ing the experience of fatigue in 
rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Care Res 2010;62:15 52-1558. 
44. Nikolaus S, Bode C, Taal E, van de Laar MAFJ (i n press). Experts’ evaluations of fatigue 
questionnaires used in rheumatoid arthritis – A Del phi study among patients, nurses and 
rheumatologists in the Netherlands. Clin Exp Rheuma tol. 
45. Nicklin J, Cramp F, Kirwan J, Greenwood R, Urba n M, Hewlett S. Measuring fatigue in 
rheumatoid arthritis: A cross-sectional study to ev aluate the Bristol Rheumatoid Arthritis 20 Fatigue Multi-Dimensional questionnaire, visual ana logue scales, and numerical rating 
scales. Arthritis Care Res 2010;62:1559-1568. 
46. Rose M, Bezjak A. Logistics of collecting patie nt-reported outcomes (PROs) in clinical 
practice: an overview and practical examples. Qual Life Res 2009;18:125–136.  
47. Hambleton RK, Swaminathan H, Rogers HJ. Fundame ntals of Item response theory. 
Thousand Oaks: Sage; 1991. 
48. Walter OB. Adaptive tests for measuring anxiety  and depression. In: WJ van der 
Linden, CAW Glas eds. Elements of adaptive testing.  New York: Springer;2010:123–136.  
49. Nikolaus S, Bode C, Taal E, van de Laar MAFJ. F our different patterns of fatigue in 
rheumatoid arthritis patients: results of a Q-sort study. Rheumatology 2010;49:2191-2199. 
50. Streiner DL, Norman GR. Health measurement scal es—a practical guide to their 
development and use. New York: Oxford University Pr ess; 2003.  
51. Fayers PM, Machin D. Quality of life—assessment , analysis and interpretation. 
Chichester: Wiley; 2000.  
52. Yorkston KM, Johnson K, Boesflug E, Skala J, Am tmann D. Communication about the 
experience of pain and fatigue in disability. Qual Life Res 2010;19:243–251.  
53. Nikolaus S, Bode C, Taal E, van de Laar MAFJ. S election of items for a computer-
adaptive test to measure fatigue in patients with r heumatoid arthritis – A Delphi 
approach. Qual Life Res. Published online 31 July 2 011. doi: 10.1007/s11136-011-9982-8 
54. Nikolaus S, Bode C, Taal E, van de Laar MAFJ. W hich dimensions of fatigue should be 
measured in patients with rheumatoid arthritis? – A  Delphi study. Musculoskeletal Care. 
Published online 11 November 2011. doi: 10.1002/msc .222 
55. Nikolaus S, Bode C, Taal E, van de Laar MAFJ (i n preparation for submission). 
Calibration of a multidimensional item bank to meas ure fatigue in patients with 
rheumatoid arthritis.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
21  
 
 
Chapter 2  
 
 
 
Fatigue and factors related to fatigue in rheumatoi d arthritis:  
a systematic review 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S. Nikolaus 
C. Bode 
E. Taal 
M.A.F.J. van de Laar 
 
In preparation for submission  22 ABSTRACT 
 
Objective Patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) complain ab out fatigue. However, little 
is still known about causes and consequences of fat igue. A fully developed theoretical 
model explaining the experience of fatigue in RA is  lacking. Goal of this study was to 
systematically review studies in RA that examined f actors related to fatigue and 
differences in fatigue between RA patients and othe r patient groups, to gain more insight 
in possible causes and consequences of fatigue in R A. 
Methods  Four databases were searched for relevant studies;  MEDLINE, Web of Science, 
SCOPUS and PsychInfo. All studies with RA samples a bout the relation between fatigue 
and other variables, that defined dependent and ind ependent variables and used 
multivariate statistical methods, were included in the review. One hundred twenty nine 
studies were preliminary included. After reviewing the full-texts, we identified twenty-four 
studies on possible causes of fatigue, fifteen stud ies on possible consequences of fatigue 
and ten studies comparing levels of fatigue between  groups.  
Results  Studies found possible causes of fatigue in illness -related aspects (e.g. pain), 
physical functioning (e.g. disability), cognitive/e motional functioning (e.g. depression) and 
social aspects (e.g. negative interpersonal events) . Additionally, female gender was related 
to more fatigue. Inflammatory activity (e.g. ESR, D AS28) showed an unclear relationship 
with fatigue in RA. Possible consequences for fatig ue were found among illness-related 
aspects (e.g. morning stiffness), physical function ing (e.g. physical quality of life), 
cognitive/emotional aspects (e.g. psychological dis tress) and social aspects (e.g. work 
ability). Patients reported higher severity of fati gue than healthy subjects and fibromyalgia 
patients reported worse levels of fatigue than othe r patient groups.   
The most evidence for a relation between fatigue an d other variables was found regarding 
pain, physical functioning and depression. Many cro ss-sectional and also longitudinal 
studies reported that these variables were associat ed with fatigue.                                                                                                                                               
Conclusion This study gave an overview about variables that ar e related to fatigue in RA 
and information about fatigue levels in RA compared  to other patient groups. However, 
most of the included studies were cross-sectional a nd not all longitudinal studies 
controlled for baseline fatigue so that hardly conc lusions about causal relationships could 
be drawn.  
 
 
 
 
  
23 Fatigue is commonly reported by patients with rheum atoid arthritis (RA). 1,2  Qualitative 
research has shown that patients experience fatigue  as a multidimensional, annoying 
symptom with far-reaching consequences. 3-6 Primarily, fatigue is a subjective experience 
that can be described as ‘extreme and persistent ti redness, weakness or exhaustion—
mental, physical or both’. 7 A generally accepted definition of fatigue in RA d oes not exist, 8 
and little is known about its aetiology. 9 The number of studies including fatigue as 
outcome measure has rapidly increased over the last  years. However, a theoretical 
framework explaining the experience of fatigue in R A is lacking 10  and the phenomenon of 
fatigue is not yet described in detail. 
Hewlett et al. 11  proposed a hypothetical model for fatigue in RA, s uggesting interactions 
between different factors. The first factor, “RA”, includes disease processes. The second 
factor, “cognitive/ behavioural”, contains thoughts , feelings and behaviours. The third 
factor, “personal”, is about personal issues in the  life of a patient. The model vividly 
reflects the dynamic relations between fatigue and physical, psychological and 
environmental factors, but the authors did not prov ide evidence for the hypothesised 
relations so that the model remains on a heuristic level.  
A recent overview paper about fatigue in rheumatic diseases 12  also underlines the 
multifactorial nature of fatigue by showing example  evidence for predictors of fatigue in 
rheumatic diseases in longitudinal observation of r outine care or following intervention; 
e.g. disease activity and severity, disability, pai n, sleep disturbance, mood, self-efficacy, 
illness perceptions and coping. Our study has an ad ded value to this overview paper as it is 
a systematic review. Moreover, not only studies abo ut factors associated with fatigue 
indicating potential causes of fatigue but also stu dies indicating that fatigue has a 
potential impact on other variables will be include d and results about comparing fatigue 
levels in different patient groups will be reported .   
Although Hewlett et al. 11  proposed a bidirectional relationship between fati gue and many 
other concepts and variables, regarding this review  we find ourselves in a ‘causation 
dilemma’. The results of most studies on fatigue di d not answer questions related to 
bidirectional causation. They did not pose research  questions focused on bidirectional 
relationships and moreover did not use adequate des igns to investigate the mutual 
influence of fatigue with other variables. A majori ty of studies merely report bivariate 
correlations. For this review we included studies w hich examined the relationships at least 
multivariately and which assumed a directional asso ciation between fatigue and the other 
constructs under consideration. In general, we repo rt the directionality according the 
authors intentions of the original studies. 
For the investigation of causality, studies have to  use an adequate design. Due to the fact 
that most studies are cross-sectional, no causality  can be examined. These studies either 24 statistically predict fatigue with other factors in  a regression model or they predict other 
outcomes with fatigue. This gives insight into asso ciations and “possible” causal relations, 
but no evidence for that. Studies with a longitudin al design do give some insight into 
causality, provided that adequate controls are cond ucted as control for baseline levels of 
the predicted outcome. Therefore we registered in t his review whether a study is cross-
sectional or longitudinal, and whether analyses are  controlled for baseline levels of the 
predicted outcome. 
Aim of this study was to systematically review exis ting scientific literature about the 
relations between fatigue and disease- and patient characteristics and environmental 
variables in RA to gain more insight into possible causes and consequences of fatigue. The 
following three research questions will be addresse d based on the reviewed empirical 
studies: 1) What is reported about possible causes of fatigue in RA? 2) What is reported 
about possible consequences of fatigue in RA? 3) Wh at is reported about differences in 
the level of fatigue between different groups (e.g.  different diagnoses, patients and 
healthy controls)?   
 
 
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
 
Search strategy and study selection 
A systematic search of the literature was executed in MEDLINE, Web of Science, SCOPUS 
and PsychInfo. Main search terms were “fatigue / ti redness” in combination with “rheum* 
/ arthritis / musculoskeletal / joint disease” and “model* / theor* / framework / predict* / 
etiology / pathophysiology / factor*”. Whenever pos sible, proximity searches were used 
to make sure that the search terms, for example “fa tigue” and “model”, were mentioned 
in one sentence of a certain abstract. The detailed  search strategies are included in the 
appendix.  
The search was conducted in May 2011. All hits were  saved in EndNote and duplicates 
were removed. After that, 1923 articles were presen t in the database. First, a researcher 
(SN) read all titles and abstracts and retrieved th e potentially relevant articles. For our aim 
to summarize information about possible causes (sta tistical predictors) and consequences 
(fatigue as statistical predictor of another variab le) of fatigue, we only included studies 
which defined dependent and independent variables a nd used multivariate statistical 
methods. So we did not include studies that merely provided correlations between 
variables. Case studies and qualitative studies wer e excluded. It was chosen to also 
exclude studies on effects of (medical) interventio ns, conference papers, letters, and 
papers in languages other than English. In cases wh ere an abstract was not available or did  
25 not give enough information to make a decision, the  study was preliminary included so 
that the full-text could be screened. This procedur e resulted in a preliminary set of 129 
full-text articles.  
These articles were read and summarized by three re searchers (SN, CB, ET) and discussed 
in the team. Thereby consensus about the essential information of each article was 
obtained and agreement about the categorization of an article into one of the three 
research questions was reached. Question 1 was rela ted to statistical predictors of fatigue 
(What is reported about possible causes of fatigue in RA?). In question 2, fatigue was 
referred to as statistical predictor (What is repor ted about possible consequences of 
fatigue in RA?). Finally question 3 asked for diffe rences in fatigue severity between patient 
groups and / or healthy controls (What is reported about differences in the level of fatigue 
between different groups e.g. different diagnoses, patients and healthy controls?). On 
closer examination of the 129 abstracts/full-text m anuscripts, it turned out that some 
studies did not fulfil our inclusion criteria and h ad to be excluded. Main reason for 
exclusion was that the sample did not include patie nts with RA or no data were provided 
for this group separately. Moreover some studies di d not conduct relevant analyses with 
fatigue as variable and for some abstracts no origi nal research article existed. 
Complementary to the electronic search, the referen ce lists of all 129 full-texts were 
searched for additional potentially relevant studie s. The procedure of selecting relevant 
articles is shown in a flowchart (figure 1). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 26 Figure 1  Flowchart of the selection of relevant studies fro m MEDLINE, Web of Science, SCOPUS, PsychInfo and 
searching reference lists  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Electronic search 
databases May 2011: 
after deleting duplicates 
1923 hits  
 
129 hits rated as relevant based 
on titles and abstracts 
82 excluded:  
-reviews 25     
-no original articles 14  
-no RA data 15             
-no multivariate analysis 
with fatigue 27                                
-double 1  
After reading the full-
texts, 47 studies were 
included and 82 excluded 47 included:  
23 about predictors of 
fatigue 
14 about fatigue as a 
predictor 
10 group comparisons 
 
By searching reference lists of relevant 
studies and review articles 2 additional 
relevant studies were found  
 
In sum 49 relevant studies were identified  
• Predictors of fatigue 24 
• Fatigue as predictor 15 
• Group comparisons 10  
27 RESULTS 
 
Description of studies 
The selected studies were summarized in one of the three tables, according to our 
research questions. We identified 24 studies about statistical predictors of fatigue (What is 
reported about possible causes of fatigue in RA?), 15 studies wherein fatigue was the 
statistical predictor of another variable (What is reported about possible consequences of 
fatigue in RA?) and 10 studies with results about c omparisons of fatigue between different 
groups (What is reported about differences in the l evel of fatigue between different 
groups e.g. different diagnoses, patients and healt hy controls?)  
Information extracted from the studies is summarize d in tables 1 to 3. The tables consist 
of five columns. The first column includes the name  of the first author and the year of 
publication. The second column contains information  about the study design and the 
applied analyses. In the third column, the used mea surement instrument for fatigue is 
shown. In the fourth column, the main results regar ding our research questions are 
summarized briefly. This column differs per table. In the result column of table 1, the 
significant statistical predictors of fatigue are s hown together with the most relevant 
statistical values and also a sub column is present  for variables that turned out to be no 
significant statistical predictor of fatigue (insof ar provided in the original studies). In table 
2, the result column displays the variables that ar e statistically predicted by fatigue 
together with the most relevant statistical values and in a sub column variables are 
inserted that are not statistically significant pre dicted by fatigue. In table 3, the mean 
fatigue scores per group are provided together with  the most relevant statistical values. In 
a sub column it is reported whether it was controll ed for possible confounders in the 
comparison of fatigue between the groups. Some stud ies provided information for more 
than one research question. For a clear overview ea ch study appears in only one of the 
three tables and the additional information is prov ided in the text.  
In the next step, the findings of the studies were summarized briefly according to five 
categories: 
1) illness-related characteristics: e.g. disease ac tivity, pain, tender joint count, swollen 
joint count, radiographic damage 
2) physical functioning: e.g. measures of disabilit y, physical functioning, health related 
quality of life, quality of sleep  
3) cognitive / emotional functioning: e.g. depressi on, anxiety, neuroticism 
4) social / environmental aspects: e.g. work, roles , family, social support,  life events  
5) demographic aspects: e.g. gender, age 
 28  Table 1:  Statistical predictors of fatigue (N=24)  
 
First 
author, year publication Sample  
(country, population, gender) Study design  Measure of 
fatigue Results  
Statis tical significant predictors of fatigue  Statistically 
not significant 
predictors  
 
Belza, 1993 
1)   
  
USA  133 RA patients 75 % female  
Cross-sectional  
Hierarchical multiple regression    
Multi-dimensional Assessment of Fatigue (MAF)   
Fatigue predicted by (beta weights) being female  
(-.36***), pain (.16*), quality of sleep (.31***), 
comorbid conditions (.15*), activity level (-.16*), 
functional status (.29**) and disease duration (-.1 4*)  
R2 for demographic variables was .14, after adding 
disease-related variables .56 and after adding psychosocial variables  .61  (adjusted R 
2 for the model .57) 
  
Education, age, depression, social support and helplessness  
 
Bergman,  2009 
2)   
USA 1) RA 14607 (22.7% male), OA 3173 (20.5% male), FM 2487  (4.7% male) 2) 1577 RA   
Cross-sectional  
Least-squares regression analysis  
VAS fatigue  (0-10)  
1) No differences in fatigue between RA and OA, but  
higher in FM (M=4.5, 4.4, 6.3) 2) Regression analysis: Fatigue mainly explained by  
patient global (R 
2=0.4)   
Inflammatory activity, joint counts and ESR 
  
29   Contreras -
Yanez, 2010 
3)  Mexico  
112 recent-onset RA patients 36 therapy-persistent  76 non-persistent 86.6% female Longitudinal  Medi cal 
evaluations every 2, 4, or 6 months  Group comparisons, correlational analyses, multivariate cox proportional hazard models  Presence / 
absence of substantial fatigue (not further defined) - Persistance on 
DMARDs, no 
other predictors   either (socio-demographic variables, disease characteristics, PROs, physician-reported outcomes, laboratory outcomes, baseline treatment) 
Davis, 
2008 4)  USA,  
58 patients with RA  Cross -
sectional Multilevel 
modeling Hierarchical regression for association between fatigue and inflammatory markers over and above demographic behavioural and health-related factors 101 -point NRS 
(0 no fatigue, to 100 fatigue as bad as it can be)  When pain  included in initial step of the regression 
models no other covariate (age, BMI, etc) was significantly related to fatigue [R 
2=0.4; b=0.7***]  
LPS-stimulated IL-6 level predicted fatigue over an d 
above the contribution of pain  
[change in R 2 = 0.4;  b = .21*]   Plasma levels 
of both CRP        (r=-0.12*) and IL-6 (r=0.11*), age, sex, ethnicity, BMI, sleep disturbance alcohol use, steroid medication use, pain 
 30  Davis, 
2010 5)  US A 
228 RA patients,  94 % women  Longitudinal  
30 daily diaries 30 deviation scores for each variable Descriptive 
statistics, comparisons between groups, multilevel and hierarchical linear regression models 101 -point NRS 
(0 no fatigue, to 100 fatigue as bad as it can be) 
 Women more daily fatigue than men  (men: M=29.6 
SD=20.5, women: M=34.1 SD=23.8)**  Same day-fatigue predicted by one or more comorbid 
pain conditions (beta=11.8***), days with more than  
average pain level (beta=.5***) and more than avera ge 
number of negative interpersonal events (t=.4*), 
association between changes in positive interperson al 
events and same-day fatigue varied by sex (-.36*), inverse relation in women but not in men  Next day fatigue predicted by comorbid pain conditi on 
(beta=8.35***), same-day fatigue (.3***), pain (.1* **), 
negative events (.6*) and interaction positive even ts 
and being female (.4*)  Women posim_(g)ve events →less same day fam_(g)gue →more next day fatigue  Relam_(g)on negam_(g)ve events → fam_(g)gue is mediated by negative affect For men no 
relations positive events with same day and next day fatigue No significant statistical predictors were age, education, income, employment status, marital / romantic relationship status, general health, daily pain  
Dhir, 2009 6)  North India  
200 RA patients (30 FM, 170 without FM),  mainly women 200 gender matched controls  Cross -
sectional Comparisons 
between groups, correlational analyses, linear regression 10 cm VAS 
fatigue about preceding week FM was present in 15% of RA patients compared to 2. 5% 
of controls RA patients with FM had more fatigue (M=3.9, SD=2.7  vs 
M=1.4, SD=2.3**)  For RA, pain and fatigue were independently predict ed 
by number of tender points and DAS28-3  
(combined r=0.5*** and combined r=0.5***)  Not reported  
  
31   Fifield, 2001 
7)   USA 415 patients with RA,  83% female   10 year longitudinal study, fatigue assesed once per year from year 2 through 8 (so 7 years)  Descriptive analyses, hierarchical linear models, growth-curve analysis (to examine variations in initial fatigue levels and changes in fatigue during 7 years for patients with and without a history of affective disorder (AD)) history of affective disorder: fulfilling DSM-IV criteria for major depression (MD) or generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) at one time in the past as measured with Semi-Structured Assessment for the Genetics of Alcoholism, one interview  Question about fatigue: On a scale of 0 to 100, with 0 being no fatigue at all and 100 being the most fatigue possible, how much arthritis fatigue did you feel in the past week?  Initial fatigue scores were in middle range (mean in itial 
fatigue =50, 95% confidence interval=47.1-52.3) and scores increased 5% per year (β01=mean growth rate = 0.5, p=0.3) individuals with AD history had higher levels of fat igue 
in first year and remained higher entire study comp ared 
to those without AD 3% of between-subject variance in initial fatigue due  to 
history of AD (56% of total variance) effect of AD history on fatigue mediated through 
current distress 
History of AD → higher levels of distress aggregate d 
over a full 7 years  Higher levels of distress →  higher inim_(g)al fam_(g)gue i n AD 
but less increase over time Fatigue is linked to history of AD (Fatigue 10% high er in 
subjects with AD, stable over 7 years and does not 
increase at faster time than in patients without AD)  
Changes in fatigue and changes in distress positive ly 
related within individuals  Co-morbidity, disease duration (RA)    
 32   
Finan, 2010 
8)   
USA 231 RA patients 70 male, 161 female   
Longitudinal, cross-sectional analyses  
30 daily diaries, multilevel modeling  
Fatigue VAS (What number between 0 and 100 best describes your average level of fatigue today? 0 no fatigue, 100 fatigue as bad as it can be)  
Daily increase in PIE (positive interpersonal event s) 
results in decreased fatigue (β=-.6, SE=.1), F(1,6)=30.2***), Daily increase in NIE (negative 
interpersonal events) results in increased fatigue (β=.6, 
SE=.2), F(1, 6=13.1, **) Interaction PIE/NIE significant (R 
2=.03) effect on fatigue 
Fatigue higher on days with few PIE or many NIE, reduction of fatigue only with combination of many P IE 
with few NIE (absence of NIE not enough to decrease fatigue) 
 → Blunm_(g)ng hypothesis supported: reducm_(g)on of 
fatigue related to days with many PIE diminished when  
patients also had many NIE Both PIE and NIE lead to more fatigue next day (β = .4, 
SE=.1), F(1,6)=19.5***) and (β =.6, SE=.2), F(1,6)= 11**) 
  
Neuroticism, extraversion were no moderator 
 
Van Hoogmoed, 2010 
9)   
NL 228 RA patients 63 % female   
Cross-sectional  
Multiple stepwise regression analysis  
Checklist Individual Strength (CIS)  
Predictors of fatigue (betas): age (-0.1***), RF 
(reumafactor, -0.2***), pain severity (0.1*), bodil y pain 
(-0.2**) physical functioning (-0.1*), role functio ning     
(-0.1*), Depressive mood (0.2**), self-efficacy on fatigue 
(-0.2***), coping (worrying, 0.2*), catastrophising 
(magnification of fatigue -0.1*), sleep disturbance s 
(0.1**)  
Gender, joint count, optimisme, self-esteem, social functioning, social support, physical activity  
  
33  Huyser, 
1998 10)  73 RA patients  
45% female Cross -
sectional Principal 
component factor analysis, correlational analyses, Kruskal-Wallis tests, regression models with all possible combinations of predictor variables  Piper Fatigue 
Self-Report Scale (PFS) Pred ictors of fatigue were pain  (β=1.9***) , depressive 
symptoms (β=2.6***), and female sex (β=9.9**) 
(adjusted R2 total model =0.5) entire model predict ive 
of fatigue***  and explained 53% of the variance in PFS 
All other variables subsequently, one at a time, ad ded to 
the model; the following contributed significantly (p<0.1) to increase in R2: longer symptom duration 
(beta=0.03 increase of 0.03), less perceived adequa cy of 
social support (beta=-0.32, increase of 0.027), and  less 
disease activity (beta=-1.6, increase of 0.02) Many 
potential predictors included in analysis, e.g. anxiety, self-efficacy, coping, sleep, life stress, functional ability 
Jump, 
2004 11)  USA  
48 RA patients with prior affective disorder, 74 without prior affective disorder, more than 90% female Cross -
sectional Diffe rences 
between groups, hierarchical regression   Multi -
dimensional Assessment of Fatigue (MAF) with GFI (global fatigue index) 27% without ADH (history of affective disorder) 
described fatigue as continuous, 45% of those with AD H 
did (X 2=6.2*) 
>50% reported that fatigue was not related to RA flar es, 
28% that fatigue occurred during flares (no differen ce 
between those with and without ADH) Patients with ADH rated fatigue, stiffness and pain as 
more serious than those without ADH. GFI higher for ADH group (34.4 vs 28.8)  Hierarchical regression model to predict fatigue (R
2 
whole model 0.27): ADH unique and independent 
contribution to the variance (8%, F(4,1)=3.1, *) when  
controlling for self-efficacy and neuroticism, self -efficacy 
and neuroticism also predictors (combined 17% 
F(6,1)=6.8, ***), but only SE uniquely predicted fa tigue 
SE partly mediated relation between ADH and fatigue,  
Neuroticism does not sign. influence the relation between ADH and fatigue Fatigue predicted by a history of affective disorde r, this 
relationship is mediated by self-efficacy Control for 
age, education, illness duration (no betas reported) 
 34  Mancuso, 
2006 12 ) 122 RA and 
122 controls  Follow-up about 14 months later 91 RA and 89 controls Longitudinal  Multivariate 
regression analysis Fa tigue 
Severity Scale (FSS) at enrolment  and one year later In RA more fatigue than controls (M=4.2, SD=1.2  vs  
M=3.4, SD=1.1)***, also after 1 year (M=4.1, SD=1.3  vs 
M=3.2, SD=1.0) Cross-sectional MRA: For RA group: more fatigue 
associated with more anxiety (contributions to 
cumulative variance 0.3), more disability (0.1), le ss 
social support (0.02), and more social stress (0.04 ) 
(p≤0.03 for each variable, R 2=0.5).   
Enrolment variables associated with worse fatigue at follow-up, based on longitudinal multivariate regre ssion 
analysis, were less help at home (contributions to 
cumulative variance 0.1), more anxiety (0.1), and m ore 
disability (0.2) (p≤0.007 for each variable, R 2=0.3). 
 Depressive 
symptoms, role satisfaction,  physical activity, sleep quality at enrolment  
Odegard, 
2008 13)  Norway, RA 
patients 74.4% female N=550 at start N=216 later 10 year 
follow-up ANOVA, ANCOVA, 
logistic regression 100 mm VAS 
fatigue Gender  difference in fatigue as measured 10 years after 
disease onset; women worse than men (women mean of 47.9 and men 33.3; 61% women > 40 mm and 35.8% of men) - 
Parrish, 
2008 14)  US  
89 RA, 76 OA, 90 FM Only female  Longitudinal 
30 daily diaries Multilevel analysis  VAS fatigue    
0-100, 4 item fatigue PANAS-X Fatigue higher in FM (M=55.8, SD=12. 9) than in RA 
(M=33.5,SD=17.3) and OA (M=37.4,SD=19.4) Negative events predicted more fatigue in all patie nt 
groups Different reactions of patient groups on positive e vents; 
OA next day fatigue decreases, RA and FM next day fatigue increases  Always 
controlled for prior day fatigue  
  
35   
Pollard, 2006 
15)   
UK Sample 1: 228 RA Sex ratio 4 : 1 (female : male) Sample 2: 274 RA (3:1)  
Cross-sectional  
Descriptive statistics, group comparisons, simple linear regression followed by multiple linear regression fitted to all variables in stepwise manner  
100 mm VAS SF-36 subscale vitality  
Regression coefficients (beta):  Sample 1: pain (0.5***), HAQ (7.2***), depression 
(11.0*), MTX (-8.1***), erosions (-7.5**) predicted  
fatigue (VAS) Sample 2: pain (0.4***), mental health (-0.4***), 
patient global (0.2*) predicted fatigue (VAS) and H AQ 
(2.0***), pain (1.0***) and mental health (1.0***) 
predicted energy and vitality (SF-36) Each 53% of variance in VAS fatigue explained    
Excluded variables: DAS 28, TJC, SJC, physician global, patient global, ESR, CRP, age, sex, disease duration and other variables (especially regarding medication)  
 
Repping-Wuts, 2007 
16)   
150 patients with RA, NL 137 at baseline and 123 follow-up  
Longitudinal Follow-up design, with one-year duration  
t-test, chi-squared test, univariate analysis,  logistic regression analysis  
Fatigue (CIS, baseline, one year) Two groups of patients (with and without severe fatigue based on CIS cut-off score)   
Persistent severe fatigue predicted by disability ( HAQ-
DI, B=1.0)** at baseline and average general health  
(VAS-GH, B=0.7)*** Level of baseline fatigue related to level of fatig ue at 
follow-up *** and remained constant for most patien ts   
Starting model: ESR, average ESR, SW28, average SW28, TE28, average TE28, VAS-GH, average VAS-GH, HAQ-DI baseline, HAQ-DI follow-up  
 36  Riemsma, 
1998 17)  NL 
229 RA patients,  61% female  Cross -
sectional Correlational 
analyses, regression analyses Fatigue VAS, 
How tired were you on average during the past week due to your arthritis? (0 not tired at all, 100 very tired)  Fatigue is predicted by pain ( beta=0.4***) , self -efficacy 
toward coping with RA symptoms as pain, disability, 
depression (beta=-0.2**), self- efficacy expectatio ns 
towards the mobilization of help (beta=-0.2**) and 
problematic social support (beta=0.1*) 
R2 for model 0.37 Age, sex, 
education, disability, duration, laboratory, pain, social support 
Scharloo, 
1999 18)  
 NL 
71  RA patients  without serious comorbidity 53 women  Longitudinal  
2 time points of measure (baseline and follow-up about 1 year later) Multiple regression  Tiredness over 
last week measured with VAS (0-100)  Baseline scores (tiredness  at time 1, beta=0.4***) 
explained 40% of variance of in tiredness 1 year lat er. 
Perceived consequences of RA 8% (beta=0.2***), 
identity perceptions (belief that experienced sympt oms 
as part of RA) 4% (beta=0.4***) and avoidant coping 3% 
(beta=0.2***) predictor of fatigue 1 year later. Illness 
duration, disease severity, other illness perceptions and coping strategies  
Sokka, 
2009 19)  
 6004 RA 
patients  from multi-national cohort (QUEST-RA) 25 landen 79% female Cross -
sectional Descriptive 
statistics, group comparisons, effect sizes Fatigu e 
measured with a VAS Fatigue predicted by gender : Women had higher scores  
(poorer status) than men in all Core Data Set measu res 
Mean fatigue was 4.6 for women versus 3.7 for men (***) in entire group, Cohen´s D: 0.3 (effect size of 
gender) Moreover examined gender differences in fatigue per  
number of swollen joints, gender differences were mos t 
pronounced in patients with low swollen joint counts  - 
  
37   
Stebbings, 2010 
20)   
New Zealand 103 RA and 103 OA patients RA: 29.1% male OA: 47.1% male   
Cross-sectional study  
Group comparisons, correlation analyses, multivariate linear regression analyses  
MAF (GFI)  
Fatigue OA>RA, CRP in RA>OA, in OA more persons with  
“moderate” fatigue (OA group had more severe diseas e 
than RA group) Difference in fatigue NOT significant between RA and  
OA after control for HAQ scores Regression analysis RA: predictors for fatigue: anx iety, 
depression (beta 0.8 and 1.1***)  
Age, sex, disability, disease activity (DAS), erosive damage and pain, CRP, sleep 
 
Stone, 1997 
21)   
N= 35 75% female   
7 days (EMA measure 7 times per day)   
Ecological momentary assessments (EMA) for better recalling of current states  Ordinary least square (OLS) regression Repeated measures analysis of variance (RMANOVA)    
7 point scale (0 not at all, 3 moderately)  
OLS: higher fatigue variability significantly assoc iated 
with more pain, fatigue, joint pain, muscle pain,  
stiffness on awakening, pain on awakening, swelling on  
awakening and poorer sleep quality 
No sign. differences in pain or fatigue by day of t he 
week but strong effects of time of day for both (fat igue: 
F(1,1)=77.6,****), Fatigue moderate in morning, lowe st 
between 10 am and noon, steep rise throughout rest o f 
the day Higher pain levels on stressful days, but no sign. difference found for fatigue Sleep measured on daily basis: Fatigue not predicte d by 
number of hours slept but by sleep quality (*)  
Neuroticism, anxiety, depression, average number of hours sleep each night   Sleep measured on daily basis: Fatigue not predicted by number of hours slept  
 38   
 Thyberg, 2009 
22)   
 Sweden n=320 (RA<1year) N=276 (191 women, 86 men)  
 Cross-sectional analyses Longitudinal data: measure at 3,6,12 months, then once per year to 8 years follow-up Here: follow-
up 12, 24, 36 months (M12, M24, M36)  
 Correlations, differences between groups, principal component analysis (PCA), multiple linear regression analysis      
 VAS fatigue (0-100 mm)  
 At M12 and M36: Women more fatigue than men (M=40 vs M=30)*, age 
and fatigue only small correlations When comparing fatigue at M12 with M24 and M24 with M36, no differences, either in men or women - Underlying components (turned out same for men an d 
women): I) physical disability: disease activity, Activity limit HAQ, 
Pain 
II) mental aspects: mental health, Sleep disturbanc e 
 -MLRA: Women:  fatigue explained more by I than by II at M  12 
(beta 0.38 vs -0.31)but at M24 (0.33 vs -0.48) and 36 
(0.34 vs -0.45), more by II than by I, age at inclu sion was 
only significant predictor of fatigue at M36 (-0.17 ), 
R2=0.46 
Men:  fatigue explained more by II than by I at M12  
(beta 0.28 vs -0.44), at M24 I more than II (0.41 v s 0.28), 
at M36 still I more than II (0.62 vs ?)and age at i nclusion 
was significant predictor (-0.30), R 2=0.47 
    
 - 
  
39  Treharne, 
2008 23)  UK  
154 RA patients  74% female Longitu dinal 
(2 points of measuring: baseline and follow-up one year later) Multiple 
hierarchical linear regression analysis Hierarchical regression of fatigue after 1 year:  Fatigue 100 
mm VAS (anchors: no fatigue, unbearable fatigue) All variables measured at baseline and fatigue also at follow-up Step1: fatigue baseline, Step2: demographics, Step3 : 
disease impact, Step4: illness perceptions (consequences and self-efficacy), Step5: praying / hoping  Baseline fatigue explained 13% of the variance in fa tigue 
1 year later*** In final model inflammation (ESR) (beta=-0.2*), 
perception of consequences of RA (beta=0.3*) and se lf-
efficacy (beta=-0.3, p=0.06) were significant predic tors, 
R2=0.39 whole model Age,  sex, 
employment status, DMARD use, pain, impact of disability, sleep disruption, depressed mood, praying/ hoping coping 
Wolfe, 
1996 24)  N= 1488 (RA= 
628; OA= 535; FM= 325) 81% female Cross -
sectional Multivariate 
regression analysis, group comparisons VAS fatigue  
(0-3)  Substantial, clinically important fatigue (>= 2 on VAS) 
present in 42% RA 41% OA and 76% of FM  RA predictors (standardized beta coefficient): Pain  
(0.2***), sleep disturbance (0.2***), depression 
(0.1***), tender points (0.1***), disability (0.2** *) 
strongest independent predictors of fatigue in 
multivariate analysis, R 2 total = 0.49 
In all 3 groups fatigue associated with pain, sleep 
disturbance, depression  Age, ESR, 
morning stiffness and sex  
 
* = p ≤ 0.5, ** = p ≤ 0.01, *** = p ≤ 0.001  
 40 The studies which examined statistical predictors o f fatigue revealed that concepts from 
all five categories (illness-related, physical func tioning, cognitive/emotional and social/ 
environmental, demographics) showed significant ind ependent relationships with the 
severity of fatigue as reported by patients with RA .  
 
Within the category of illness-related variables, e levated pain most often came to the fore 
as complaint associated with increased levels of fa tigue.  This relation was supported by 
cross-sectional 1,4,9,10,15,17,22,24  and longitudinal studies 5,21  in that was controlled for previous 
fatigue levels. Only two studies reported that pain  was not significantly related to fatigue; 
the cross-sectional study of Stebbings 20  and the longitudinal study of Treharne 23  in that 
was controlled for baseline fatigue.  
Characteristics of inflammatory activity (e.g. ESR,  DAS28, flares), however, showed an 
unclear relationship with fatigue in RA. In some st udies these markers were significantly 
related to fatigue, 4,6,10,22  in other studies they did not contribute to the se verity of fatigue 
at all. 2,20,24  All studies that found a significant relation betw een inflammation and fatigue 
were cross-sectional. 4,6,10,22  Davis 4 reported that LPS-stimulated IL-6 level predicting  
fatigue over and above the contribution of pain but  fatigue was not related to plasma 
levels of both CRP and IL-6. In the study of Dhir 6 fatigue was significantly associated with 
DAS-28 while controlling for pain. In the analyses of Huyser 10  less disease activity was 
related to increased fatigue. The study of Thyberg 22  showed a significant association with 
fatigue by a cluster of disease activity, activity limitations and pain, labelled as physical 
disability.  
In a longitudinal study that controlled for previou s levels of fatigue, Stone found that 
higher fatigue variability was significantly associ ated with more stiffness and swelling on 
awakening 21  while Wolfe found in a cross-sectional analysis th at the number of tender 
points were significantly related to fatigue in RA but morning stiffness had no important 
role in the regression model. 24  
Another illness-related factor that was significant ly associated with fatigue was 
comorbidity as reported in a cross-sectional study 1 and a longitudinal study that controlled 
for previous fatigue levels. 5 Moreover, disease / symptom duration turned out to  be 
significantly related to fatigue in two cross-secti onal studies. 1,10  Contreras-Yanez 3 found no 
significant relation between the persistence on DMA RDs and fatigue in a longitudinal 
study. 
 
Aspects of physical functioning also contributed to  the explanation of elevated levels of 
fatigue. Regarding quality of sleep or sleep distur bances significant associations with level 
of fatigue were found in four cross-sectional studi es. 1,9,22,24  A longitudinal study 21  that  
41 controlled for previous fatigue levels  reported that fatigue was significantly related to 
sleep quality but not to the number of hours slept.  Some studies found no support for 
significant relation between sleep and fatigue; two  cross-sectional 10,20  and one 
longitudinal. 12  In some investigations also physical functioning, global health ratings and 
indications of disabilities were included. These ch aracteristics were significantly related to 
fatigue in nearly all cross-sectional studies that included them in their analyses. 1,2,9,15,17,22,24  
Only one cross-sectional study found no association  between fatigue and disability. 20  Two 
longitudinal studies that controlled for baseline f atigue, also reported a significant relation 
between fatigue and disability. 12,16   
 
Within the cluster cognitive and emotional function ing the most often investigated 
construct in relation to fatigue was depression, op erationalized as major depression or 
depressive mood. In several cross-sectional studies9,10,11,15,17,20,22,24  and one longitudinal 
study, 7 depression was significantly associated with fatig ue. Exceptions were two of the 
cross-sectional 1,12  and one of the longitudinal studies that controlle d for baseline fatigue. 23  
They did not find support for a significant relatio n between depression and fatigue. 
Regarding anxiety, contrasting results were reporte d. A cross-sectional study 20  found a 
significant relation between fatigue and anxiety, e ven so a longitudinal study controlling 
for baseline fatigue. 12  However the results of another cross-sectional 10  and longitudinal 
study controlling for previous levels of fatigue 21  did not support this relation.  Perceptions 
such as self-efficacy also turned out to be related  to fatigue. In cross-sectional studies 9,11,17  
and a longitudinal study that controlled for baseli ne fatigue 18 significant associations were 
reported. In contrast, a cross-sectional study did not find support for a relation between 
self-efficacy perceptions and fatigue. 10  
For the cluster social and environmental aspects we  found somewhat fewer studies than 
for the other characteristics. The reviewed cross-s ectional 1,8,9,10,12,17  and longitudinal 
studies 5,12,14  that controlled for baseline or previous levels of  fatigue, however, point to 
the importance of these characteristics for the exp lanation of fatigue. Negative 
interpersonal events for example were associated wi th higher levels of fatigue. 5,8,14  
Adequate social support was significantly associate d with less fatigue 12  and too less 
support or inadequate support (in the eye of the pa tient) 10,12,17  was significantly related to 
worse fatigue. Only two cross-sectional studies fou nd that social support was not related 
to fatigue. 1,9  
 
In addition, age and gender were regarded as potent ial predictors of fatigue in most of the 
reviewed studies. A relation between fatigue and ag e of patients was not demonstrated, 
except in one cross-sectional study finding that yo unger patients reported more severe 42 fatigue. 9 Regarding gender of patients, studies showed consi stent results. Female gender 
was significantly related to worse fatigue 1,10  and women reported higher levels of fatigue 
than men. 5,13,19,22  Also a study reported in table 2 found this patter n. 26  However, 
unfortunately these differences were not controlled  for confounders in many studies. This 
seems necessary since the strength of gender differ ences in fatigue were less pronounced 
in patients with higher levels of disease activity.19  The only study that did not find a gender 
difference was the longitudinal study of Belza; 40  women with RA did not report more 
fatigue than men with RA but healthy women did repo rt higher levels of fatigue than 
healthy men. 
 
Finally, longitudinal studies that included fatigue  at baseline in the prediction model of 
fatigue at follow-up, reported that fatigue at base line was significantly related to fatigue 
at follow-up one year later. 16,18,23   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
43  Table 2:  Fatigue as predictor  (N=15)  
 
First 
author, year publication Sample  
(country, population, gender) Study design  Measure of 
fatigue Results  
Fatigu e predicts…  Fatigue does 
not predict… 
Breedveld, 
2005 25)  NL, 428 RA 
patients Longitudinal  
54 weeks measures at four week intervals from baseline to week 54 Stepwise multivariate 
linear regression and logistic regression analyses with disability as dependent variable  To predict: physical function One VAS  
(0-10) Results baseline data (cross -sectional 
analyse at baseline): Linear regression model: Fatigue significantly rela ted 
to disability (β = 0.1***) Logistic regression model: fatigue related to physi cal 
disability (HAQ ≥ 2): β= 0.2** OR = 1.2, OR 95% CI =  
1.1 to 1.3 Longitudinal analysis: Multiple linear regression: baseline fatigue associated with physical disability at week 54  (β = 0.04*) - 
Chorus, 
2003 26)  NL, 1056 RA 
patients (72.3% female) and 658 AS patients  Cross -
sectional Multiple stepwise 
regression,   To predict: quality of life MFI (general 
fatigue, physical fatigue, reduced motivation, reduced activity, mental fatigue), range      4-20 RA and AS: General fatigue worse in women than in 
men (scores of women and men in RA: 13.2 vs. 12.3, in AS: 13.4 vs 12.4) F=7.7***, no differences betwee n 
the four groups (female RA and AS, male RA and AS) regarding other fatigue MFI  General fatigue predicts physical (beta=-0.29***, 
total R 2=0.62) and mental (beta=-0.21***, total 
R2=0.25) health related quality of life (physical and  
mental component summary scores of   SF-36) - 
  
 44   
Covic, 2006 
27)   
Australia 134 RA patients, 85% female 54 depressed 66 non-depressed   
Cross-sectional  
Pearson correlation coefficients, discriminant analysis with depression categories as dependent variable and 12 predictors as independent variables  To predict: depression   
VAS level of fatigue (10 cm line, 1 means no fatigue and 10 means extreme fatigue)  
Fatigue predictor of depression, discriminant loadi ng 
of 0.6 (p<.01) after tension, self-esteem and perceived RA impact   
- 
 
De Croon, 2005 
28)   
NL, 78 working early RA patients, more than two-thirds were female  
Cross-sectional  
Logistic regression analysis  To predict: work ability  
Checklist Individual Strength (CIS) total score from 20-140, dichotomized in fatigued and non-fatigued patients by using cut-off point of >76    
Fatigued employees with RA (N=17) report lower levels of work ability compared to non-fatigued 
employees (N=61) with RA [OR=24.0; 95% confidence interval (CI) 3.0-193.1] After adjustment for age, pain, DAS relation still significant  
- 
  
45  Davis, 2006 
29)  USA 184 RA patients 52 men and 132 women Longitudinal 30 daily diaries Multilevel modelling, multivariate,  multilevel, random effects regression analysis   To predict: daily interpersonal events in pain patients Fatigue NRS (0-100) “What number between 0 and 100 describes your average level arthritis fatigue today? A zero (0) would mean no fatigue and a one hundred (100) would mean fatigue as bad as it can be” Fatigue is significant predictor (mean daily fatigu e / 
current day´s fatigue) of negative daily events (be ta 
.01* / .01**), psitive daily events (-.004, / -.01* **), 
Daily relationship stress with friends (.002, 1.3 / .003, 
12.3***), D. r. stress with family (.004, 4.9* / .00 1, 
.8), D. r. enjoyment with family (-.001, .3 / -.002,  
3.9*), Enjoyment spouse (.00, .03 / -.002, 7.7**) a t 
the same day Experience of intractable pain, fatigue, and disabi lity 
explained only about 3% of the between-person 
variance in reports of both negative and positive 
events 
The amount of day-to-day variation in events accounted for by variations in pain and fatigue ranged from 1% for negative and 3.4% for positive 
events Fatigue not predicts: Daily relationship enjoyment with friends, D. r. stress co-workers, D. r. enjoyment co-workers,  D. r. stress with spouse    
Katz, 
1998 30)   USA  
446 RA patients, 80% female Cross -
sectional Multivariate regression 
analysis  To predict: stressors of rheumatoid arthritis (e.g. impact of fatigue) Fatigue 2 weeks 
prior, 1 item question; very mild, mild, moderate, severe, very severe (for analysis severe and very severe grouped together – dichoto-misation) Fatigue severity predicts fatigue impact 
(beta=2.27***) 
 - 
 46  Parker 
White, 2009 
31)  USA  
Mothers with MS, healthy mothers and 68 mothers with RA Cross -
sectional Hierarchical regression 
analysis To predict: caregiving environment (the mother´s experience of daily hassles of parenting, discipline style she employed, how she monitored her child´s whereabouts) 21 -item 
Modified Fatigue Impact Scale (FISK); physical fatigue, cognitive fatigue, psycho-social fatigue Mothers with MS or RA had higher levels of fatigue 
than healthy mothers Higher levels of fatigue predicted both a greater 
frequency (standard β= 0.5**) and intensity 
(standard β =0.5**) of parenting daily hassles for 
mothers with RA  
mothers with RA who reported more fatigue also reported more difficulties monitoring their child 
(standard β=0.63***) In RA fatigue 
did not 
explain 
significant 
variance in 
predictting 
laxness and 
over- 
reactivity  
Rupp, 
2004 32) NL, 490 RA 
patients 72.7% female Cross -
sectional Correlational analyses,  
8 linear regression models with 8 dimensions of RAND-36 as dependent variables, and fatigue (physical fatigue, reduced activity, mental fatigue, and reduced motivation), RA-related pain and depressive symptoms as independent variables (general fatigue left out to reduce risk of (multi)collinearity)  To predict: health-related quality of life 100 -mm VAS 
ranging from 0 (no fatigue) to 100 (fatigue as bad as it could be) MFI-20 (general fatigue, physical fatigue, reduced activity, mental fatigue, reduced motivation) HRQOL is predicted by fatigue; different aspects of 
fatigue selectively explain different dimensions of HRQOL while taking into account pain and depressive symptoms (beta p<0.05): physical fatigue: physical functioning (-2.2), soci al 
functioning (-1.2), role limitations physical (-2.7 ), 
vitality (-1.2), pain (-1.0), general health percep tions 
(-1.9) reduced activity: social functioning (-0.9), role 
limitations emotional   (-1.2), vitality (-0.5), pa in         
(-0.7) reduced motivation: vitality (-0.7) 
mental fatigue: role limitations physical (-1.1) an d 
emotional (-1.0), mental health (-0.4) when entered last to the model, fatigue added 1 (mental health)-14% (vitality) to the explained variance of HRQOL  - 
  
47  Smedstad, 1996 
33)  Norway, 238 RA patients, 73,5% female, 116 controls  Cross-sectional t-tests and multiple linear regression analyses with GHQ (General Health Questionnaire, subscales for anxiety, depression, social dysfunction and somatization) as dependent variable and patient status (patient or control) and pain, disability and fatigue as independent variables To predict: psychological distress   Nottingham Health Profile (NHP): disability (8 items), pain (8 items), fatigue (3 items, score range 3-6, 3 being max. fatigue)  Fatigue measure with NHP validated with Ritchie articular index (r=-.32)** Fatigue higher in patients (4.8) than in controls (5.4)*** Differences between patients and controls regarding sum GHQ (mental distress) and all subscales no 
longer significant when controlling for fatigue  - 
Waltz, 
2000 34)  136 Dutch RA 
patients, 98 German RA patients 70 % women Longitudinal  
3 points of measures (baseline, after 12 and after 24 months) Examination of 
univariate associations Multivariate analysis with hierarchical regression model  To predict: consumption patterns Compo site 
Index of Fatigue Impairment (CIFI) Symptoms: 11 point NRS and the 3 items of the NHP  Sample split up into four groups according to level of fatigue (I low, IV high) Fatigue co ntributes to physician consultations 
(change in R 2=0.04) and referral to a physical 
therapist in two years following baseline measures as 
assessed at 12 and 24 months  -  
 48  Wolfe, 
2004 35 ) USA  
1) 825 RA patients  79.7% female  2) 12217 RA patients Longitudinal  
At least 2 consecutive semi-annual measures  Ordered logistic 
regression, general estimating equations   To predict: symptom importance in RA Fatigue 
measured VAS with a range from 0-10, question: How much of a problem has fatigue or tiredness been for you in the past week? (anchors: Fatigue is no problem and fatigue is a major problem) Patients ranking of symptom importance: 8% of the 
patients rated fatigue as the most important symptom above sleep problems but after functional status, pain, cognition and gastrointestinal sympto ms 
In multivariate-ordered logistic regression –analys is 
and VAS fatigue, HAQ, pain, depression, age and sex  
as independent variables, only VAS fatigue predicte d 
the ranked position for fatigue importance (OR 12.,  
95% CI 1.1 to 1.2,***), ranking of fatigue not rela ted 
to use of anti-TNF agents or prednisone - 
Wolfe, 
2008 36)  USA  
9921 RA patients (75.5% female), 2851 patients with noninflammat ory rheumatic disorder (not FM, 79.6% female), 2867 FM patients Cross -
sectional Logistic regression in 
univariate and multivariate analysis, Kendeall´s tau to examine association between combined dryness and RA symptom scales To predict: oral and ocular dryness Fatigue VAS (0 -
10) alone  Symptom intensity scale (SI): consisting of 1 VAS fatigue and regional pain scale (RPS) Fatigue one of four predictors of dryness in RA  
(beside SI, pain and sleep scale) In RA (N=9921) SI strongest correlate of dryness, then RPS, then fatigue alone (mean 4.1, SD=2.9,       
Z-score 19.9***, Tau-a (95%CI: 0.08 (0.08 to 0.1) - 
  
49  Wolfe, 
2009 37)  USA  
20268 RA patients 1075 RA patients from RAES and ARCK datasets Cross -
sectional Generalized linear 
model (GLM), Cox time-varying regression analyses Recursive partitioning to determine the best cutpoints for each clinical variable (very satisfied with health yes or no) using the RPART and Random forest programs To predict: RA outcome and treatment success and failure (satisfaction with health as surrogate for treatment success) VAS fatigue (21 
points from 0 to 10 at 0.5-unit intervals) Patients without comorbidity who were very satisfied 
with their health (N=1774) and who were not very 
satisfied with their health (N=3958) differed on 
fatigue;  not very satisfied: mean 4.1 and very 
satisfied: 1.5 (median 1.0) 
For fatigue the point of separating very satisfied and 
not satisfied states is <=1.7 (all patients) or <=1 .3 
(patients without comorbidity) - 
Wolfe, 2009 
38)  USA 22131 RA patients, 3717 non inflamma-tory disease, 1002 SLE, 2674 FM Cross-sectional Several analyses to examine differences between groups and associations between variables, fractional polynominal logistic regression  To predict: depression Fatigue VAS   Symptom intensity scale (SI): consisting of 1 VAS fatigue and regional pain scale In RA, fatigue significantly different for depresse d 
(Mean 6.5) and non-depressed (Mean 4.3) RA patients Fatigue and pain are important predictors of self-
reported depression (especially correlated with SI 
score - SI scale best predictor of depression) in R A 
SI scale values for the quartiles for the SI scale are Q1 
0-1.5, Q2 1.75-3, Q3 3.25-5 and Q4 5.25-9.75 (increasing quartiles associated with striking incre ase 
in cumulative risk of self-reported depression) - 
 50  Yazici, 
2004 39)  USA  
337 patients with early RA 75% female  Cross -
sectional and longitudinal design (patients with minimally two visits during 3,5 years).  Cross -sectional data 
analysis (ordered logit regression models) with: 5 confounders, disability, pain, patient global, fatigue, number of symptoms, swollen 
joint count, tender joint 
count, ESR Longitudinal analysis (random-effects logistic regression): age, disease duration, disability, pain, patient global, fatigue, number of symptoms  To predict: morning stiffness 10 cm VAS 
fatigue Analysis wit h cross -sectional data: regression model 
to estimate associations between 4-categories of morning stiffness and other variables: fatigue OR a nd 
95% CI 1.3 (1.2,1.4) in univariate model and 0.9 (0.9,1.1) in multivariate model Longitudinal data: for fatigue OR 1.1 (1.0, 1.2) - 
  
51 In these 15 studies, fatigue turned out to be signi ficantly related to several different 
variables.  
 
Regarding illness-related aspects, it turned out th at fatigue was significantly related to 
symptoms of ocular and oral dryness 36  and morning stiffness 39  in cross-sectional studies. 
Also functional aspects were associated with fatigu e. A longitudinal study found that 
fatigue statistically predicted physical functionin g 25  while controlling for baseline physical 
functioning. Two cross-sectional studies reported t hat fatigue was significantly related to 
physical quality of life 26,32  and that different aspects of health related quali ty of life were 
associated with different aspects of fatigue. 32   
Regarding cognitive/emotional aspects it turned out  that fatigue was significantly related 
to mental health related quality of life, 26,32  and satisfaction with health 37  as reported by 
cross-sectional studies. A cross-sectional and a lo ngitudinal study found that the level of 
fatigue statistically predicted the importance of f atigue as perceived by patients. 30,35  Two 
cross-sectional studies reported that fatigue was s ignificantly associated with 
depression 27,38  and another that fatigue was associated with globa l psychological 
distress. 33   
The following social aspects were reported to be re lated to fatigue. A cross-sectional study 
found that fatigue was a significantly related to w ork ability. 28  In a longitudinal study 29  
fatigue turned out to be related to same-day negati ve daily events, positive daily events, 
stress with friends, stress with family, enjoyment with family, enjoyment with the spouse 
but not to enjoyment with friends, stress or enjoym ent with coworkers and stress with the 
spouse. 29  A cross-sectional study about the impact of fatigu e on parenting found that 
fatigue was related to greater frequency and intens ity of parenting daily hassles, and 
having enough energy to monitor a child’s’ whereabo uts. 31  Fatigue was not significantly 
associated with laxness and over reactivity in moth ers with RA. 31  Additionally, a 
longitudinal study found that fatigue was significa ntly associated with physician 
consultations, and referral to a physical therapist  during two years. 34                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
In conclusion, fatigue in RA is related to as well illness-related aspects as functional, 
cognitive/emotional and social aspects.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 52  Table 3:  Comparisons of levels of fatigue between patient g roups and healthy subjects (N=10) 
 
First author, year publication Sample  (country, population, gender) Study design Measure of fatigue Results 
Comparison between groups Confounders 
Belza, 1995 
40)  USA N= 97:  with RA n= 51,  85% female; without RA   n= 46, 91% female Longitudinal  Question-naires completed 3 times in 6-8 week-intervals, repeated measures of variance (ANCOVA)  Multidimensional Assessment of Fatigue (MAF) GFI (global fatigue index) - Women with RA did not report more fatigue than me n 
(healthy women reported higher fatigue than healthy  
men) -Fatigue scores calculated for each time point: Pat ients 
have higher mean scores on each dimension of fatigu e 
than controls*** (severity 5.4 vs 3.2, degree 6.3 v s 4.2, 
distress 4.9 vs 3.0, impact 4.2 vs 2.6, timing 2.9 vs 2.1) - 
Crosby, 1991 
41)  11 females, 4 males with RA (5 in disease flare, 10 either in remission or disease was mildly active) 12 controls Cross-sectional Descriptive statistics, analysis of variance  10 cm VAS fatigue (anchors 0% = no fatigue and 100% = extremely fatigued) No significant differences in fatigue between contr ols 
(M=6.0, SD=2.5), RA flare (M=7.4, SD=2,4) and RA no n-
flare (M=5.1, SD=2.8) (ANOVA (F(2,2)=1.4,p=0.3) - 
  
53   
Currey, 2003 
42)   
USA, N=619  RA 334 FM 152 OA 133 RA 71% vrouw  
Survey (part of longitu-dinal study)  
Univariate analyses and multiple linear regression models  
10 cm VAS fatigue to assess degree to which unusual fatigue or tiredness has been a problem over the past week on a scale of 0 = no problem and 10 = a major problem  
Fatigue in FM 6.4, RA 4.9, OA 4.9, FM significant m ore 
fatigue than RA and OA, no difference in fatigue be tween 
RA and OA -parameter estimates for differences betw een 
means by diagnosis: FM vs RA (beta 1.5***), FM vs O A 
(beta 1.6***), RA vs OA (beta 0.1 p>0.5)  
Covariates: sex, age, education, disease duration and number of chronic conditions 
 Goodchild, 2008 
43)  
  UK 34 SS 48 RA   Cross-sectional  One-way MANOVA in multiple fatigue scores between disease groups  Profile of Fatigue (ProF) Multidimensional Fatigue Inventory (MFI)  Patient groups did not differ in levels of fatigue on ProF or 
MFI   - 
Goodchild, 
2010 44)  UK, women, 
25 with RA 14 with pSS Longitudinal  
Diary study, 35 consecutive days Repeated 
measures analyses of variance (RMANOVA), multilevel analysis  Profile of Fatigue 
(somatic and mental fatigue), 4 times a day Patient groups did not differ in somatic or mental fatigue  
In both was an increase as the day progressed in th e 
severity of both kinds of fatigue (somatic: F(1.7, 64.4)=25.4*** and mental: F(2.1, 78.9)=12.1***), ti me 
course of fatigue across day did not differ per gro up - 
 54  Van Oers, 2010 
45)  NL, 29 Sjögren, 23 SLE, 19 RA, 52 healthy controls Measures at 8 time points /day, 2 consecutive days Analyses with Kruskal-Wallis one-way analysis of variance by ranks, repeated  measures analyses of variance  MFI: 5 most characteristic items (general fatigue, physical fatigue, reduced activity, reduced motivation, mental fatigue) 3 patient groups significantly higher levels of fat igue in 
comparison with healthy controls (no differences between patient groups) General fatigue: pSS M=2.3 IQR (1.9-3.4), SLE M=1.9  IQR 
(1.4-2.7), RA M=2.3 (0.8-2.9), healthy M=0.2 IQR (0 .0-0.6) 
same pattern found for the other four fatigue items  - 
Reading, 2009 
46)  USA 164 RA patients 328 persons without RA (matched for age, sex) 72% female in both groups Cross-sectional Chi-squared tests to compare the two groups, logistic regression   Berlin Sleep Questionnaire to measure risk for sleep apnea (snoring, fatigue, co-morbidities) More patients had fatigue as risk factor  (38%) than  
subjects without RA (13% ***) More RA patients (50%) were at risk of sleep apnea th an 
controls (31% ***)  Difference in fatigue remained after adjustment for smoking status, BMI and high blood pressure 
Salaffi, 2009 
47)  Italy 380 FM 
patients (92% female) 693 RA patients (91% female) 1579 healthy controls (50% female) Cross-sectional Between-group comparisons (ANOVA),  multivariate linear regression models VAS fatigue; what number between 0 and 10 best describes the average level of fatigue you experienced last week (0=no fatigue; 0=fatigue as bad as it can be),Vitality scale SF-36 FM mean 40.1 (SD=12.3) RA mean 43.4 (SD=20.6) healthy controls: mean 71.6 (SD=20.1)  Difference between patients and healthy controls were  
significant *** Gender differences only in the FM group (women reported worse health) 
  
55  Wolfe, 
2004 48)  11866 RA 
patients 1731 also fulfilled criteria for fibro-myalgia  Cross -
sectional  Regression 
analyses  VAS fatigue  RA patients with FM had substantially more abnormal  
scores on all disease activity and status variables   
Regarding fatigue: Mean (SD) 3.8 (2.6) in those wit hout 
FM and 8.1 (1.1) in those with FM Fatigue is higher in RA patients who also satisfy t he 
criteria for FM - 
Zautra, 
2007 49)  USA  
89 RA, 76 OA, 90 FMS patients Only women 32 daily 
diaries Multilevel 
analysis   Fatigue with one 
single item (number between 0 and 100)  FMS fatigue levels significantly higher than in R A and OA  
Fatigue levels OA 37.4, RA 33.5 and FMS 55.8, FMS patients more day-to-day variation in fatigue than RA and 
OA  - 
 
 56 The 10 studies shown in table 3 did not provide inf ormation about relations of fatigue 
with other variables, but about differences in fati gue between groups (patients with 
different diagnoses, patients and healthy controls) .  
 
Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and healthy controls: 
Belza 40  found that patients with RA reported higher levels  of fatigue than controls. The 
studies of Mancuso 12  (table 1), van Oers, 45  Reading, 46  and Salaffi 47  also showed higher 
fatigue levels in patients with RA than in healthy controls and mothers with MS or RA 
reported higher levels of fatigue when compared to healthy mothers 31  (table 2). In 
contrast, Crosby 41  reported no differences between patients with RA i n flare, those not in 
flare and healthy controls. However these results a re based on very small samples so that 
it is doubtable whether conclusions about differenc es between groups can be drawn from 
this study. 
 
Rheumatoid arthritis (RA), fibromyalgia (FM) and os teoarthritis (OA): 
Fibromyalgia (FM) patients reported significantly m ore fatigue than those with 
rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and osteoarthritis (OA), while no difference in fatigue was found 
between patients with RA and OA. 42,49  Studies that are summarized in table 1 found 
comparable results. 2,14,24  In the study of Salaffi, 47  patients with FM reported less vitality 
than patients with RA. 
Wolfe 48  found that fatigue reports were higher in RA patie nts who also satisfy the criteria 
for FM than in those with RA only. That is in line with the findings of Dhir, 6 a study 
displayed in table 1. 
Stebbings 20  found that fatigue was reported as more severe in OA than in RA. However it 
has to be noted that the difference in fatigue did not remain significant after controlling 
for HAQ scores and the OA group had more severe dis ease parameters than the RA group. 
 
Rheumatoid arthritis (RA), Sjögrens´ syndrome (SS) and systemic lupus erythematodes 
(SLE): 
Patients with RA and SS did not differ on levels of  fatigue. 43  In another study of 
Goodchild 44  it turned out that RA and SS patients did not diff er in somatic or mental 
fatigue either. In both groups the severity of both  kinds of fatigue increased as the day 
progressed, and the time course of fatigue across t he day did not differ per group. 44  
Van Oers 45  reported about comparable levels of fatigue betwee n patients with RA, SS and 
SLE. All those patient groups scored higher on fati gue than healthy controls. 
  
57 In conclusion, most studies found that patients rep ort higher levels of fatigue than healthy 
controls and that FM is the patient group that has the worst fatigue outcomes compared 
to other patient groups. RA patients had comparable  levels of fatigue as patients with OA, 
SS and SLE. 
 
                           
 
DISCUSSION         
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
This systematic review gave an overview of the exis ting literature on factors that are 
related to fatigue in RA. We systematically summari zed the included studies according to 
our research questions: 1) What is reported about p ossible causes of fatigue in RA? 2) 
What is reported about possible consequences of fat igue in RA? 3) What is reported about 
differences in the level of fatigue between differe nt groups (e.g. different diagnoses, 
patients and healthy controls)?   
In conclusion, regarding question 1, we found the f ollowing factors: illness-related aspects 
(pain), physical functioning (sleep quality, sleep disturbances, global health ratings, 
indicators of disability), cognitive / emotional fu nctioning (depression or depressive mood, 
anxiety, perceptions such as self-efficacy) and soc ial / environmental aspects 
(interpersonal events, too less or inadequate socia l support) and female gender. 
Not all illness-related aspects showed a clear rela tionship with RA. Regarding 
characteristics of inflammatory activity (e.g. ESR,  DAS28, flares), inconsistent results were 
reported.   
Regarding question 2, the following factors were re ported by the reviewed studies: illness-
related aspects (ocular and oral dryness, morning s tiffness), physical functioning (physical 
quality of life), cognitive / emotional functioning  (depression, global psychological distress, 
mental health related quality of life and satisfact ion with health) and social / 
environmental aspects (work ability, negative and p ositive daily events, parenting). 
Fatigue also statistically predicted physician cons ultations and referral to a physical 
therapist.  
Regarding the third research question, it came out that most studies found that patients 
reported higher levels of fatigue than healthy subj ects and that FM is the rheumatic 
disease with the worst fatigue outcomes compared to  other forms of arthritis. 
Some of the factors came forward in answering the f irst as well as the second research 
question. That means that some studies reported tha t they statistically predicted fatigue 
and other studies found that they were predicted by  fatigue. This applied for factors 
related to the aspects physical functioning, cognit ive / emotional functioning (ratings of 58 health, depression, mental health / psychological d istress) and social / environmental 
aspects (interpersonal events). This brings us back  to the previously mentioned causation 
problem. Based on the reviewed studies, it is diffi cult to draw conclusions about causal 
relationships between fatigue and other variables. Most studies were cross-sectional and 
some of the longitudinal studies had shortcomings a s not controlling for baseline fatigue 
or using small or selected samples.  
The most convincing support was found for the predi ction of fatigue by pain, disability / 
physical functioning and depression / depressive mo od. For each of the three, more than 
ten of the reviewed studies reported significant re lationships with fatigue. Among them 
were cross-sectional but also longitudinal studies.  Regarding pain, two longitudinal studies 
that controlled for previous levels of fatigue, fou nd a significant association with fatigue 
while one longitudinal study, that controlled for b aseline fatigue, did not support this 
finding. Physical functioning was significantly ass ociated with fatigue in two longitudinal 
studies that controlled for baseline fatigue. One l ongitudinal study found support for a 
significant relation between fatigue and depression  while another did not find this. In 
conclusion, these three variables could be regarded  as potential causes for fatigue in RA 
while for pain and physical functioning more convin cing support was found than for 
depression.  
However, for the closer examination of causality, i t would be necessary to conduct 
prospective, longitudinal studies in representative  samples. These studies should use an 
adequate measurement instrument of fatigue and shou ld apply multivariate analysis 
techniques with check for confounders. Not all of t he reviewed studies clearly described 
whether they checked for confounders and if so for which confounders. Moreover, in 
more than half of the reviewed studies fatigue was only measured with a single visual 
analogue scale (VAS) or numerical rating scale (NRS ). That does not correspond to the 
multidimensional character of fatigue as reported b y patients. 14,15  Only few studies used a 
fatigue questionnaire containing more than one dime nsion; those reported in more than 
one study were the Multidimensional Assessment of F atigue (MAF) (e.g. 1, 20 ), Checklist 
Individual Strength (e.g. 16,9 ) and Multidimensional Fatigue Inventory (e.g. 26, 43 ). It has 
to be noted that only one of these instruments, the  MAF, is an RA specific questionnaire 
and some items of the other two scales could be rel ated to disability or disease activity in 
RA. 13   
Furthermore, it would be important to measure other  variables appropriately. For 
example regarding sleep disturbances, it turned out  that patients are not aware of their 
actual number of awakenings during the night. 16   
We decided not to include a numerical quality asses sment of the studies that are included 
in this review as it turned out to be very difficul t due to the diversity of studies, different  
59 measurements of fatigue and a lack of guidelines or  standards for quality assessments of 
studies other than intervention studies as the Coch rane guideline. 17   
 A limitation of this review is that it did not acc ount for positive publication bias. Possibly, 
studies that did not find associations between fati gue and other variables were not 
published and therefore not identified by our searc h strategy. Moreover we cannot 
control whether some studies only reported the sign ificant results and not the non-
significant ones. Furthermore, we had to use proxim ity searches, meaning that the search 
in the databases was constrained to studies includi ng a certain combination of search 
terms within a relatively small area of words in th e abstract. Otherwise it would have been 
impossible to conduct this review with manageable e fforts because the titles and 
abstracts to read would have been far more than the  1923 hits received now. However, 
we thoroughly checked the reference lists of the in cluded studies for additional relevant 
studies.  
The strength of this study is that it provides an o verview of the state of the art regarding 
research about fatigue and factors related to fatig ue in RA. Unfortunately we cannot draw 
solid conclusions about causal relationships becaus e most of the included studies were 
cross-sectional and the longitudinal studies had so me shortcomings either. When 
comparing our findings with the hypothetical model proposed by Hewlett et al. 11  it is 
obvious that we found support for relations between  fatigue and all dimensions in the 
model. On a more detailed level, it turns out that the strongest support was found for 
relations between fatigue and variables on the RA d imension; disability, pain and sleep. 
However, the proposed relations between fatigue and  the illness related aspects cortisol 
response, inflammation, joint damage, muscle effort  and de-condition, drugs and anemia 
did not match well with the reviewed literature. On  the dimensions “cognitive, 
behavioural” referring to behaviours, emotions and cognitions, the association between 
fatigue and depression was most frequently supporte d in our review. Regarding the other 
elements of this dimension (e.g. illness beliefs an d stress, activity) and also the “personal” 
dimension referring to work/caring responsibilities , environment, health and social 
support, indications for the existence of relations  with fatigue were also found in the 
literature, but by clearly less studies than those reporting about associations between 
fatigue and pain, disability and depression. Nevert heless, this review is no test for the 
causality of the considered bivariate associations in the model of Hewlett et al. It is a 
challenge for the future to conduct research that i s able to give more insight into causes 
and consequences of fatigue in RA.  
 
 
 60 ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
 
We want to thank Dr. Marjolein Drent for supporting  the development of the search 
strategy. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
61 REFERENCES 
 
1. Wolfe F, Hawley DJ, Wilson K. The prevalence and  meaning of fatigue in rheumatic 
disease. J Rheumatol 1996;23:1407-1417. 
2. Hewlett S, Carr M, Ryan S, Kirwan J, Richards P,  Carr A, et al. Outcomes generated by 
patients with rheumatoid arthritis: how important a re they? Musculoskel Care 
2005;3:131-142. 
3. Belza Tack B. Fatigue in rheumatoid arthritis. C onditions, strategies, and consequences. 
Arthritis Care Res 1990;3:65-70. 
4. Hewlett S, Cockshott Z, Byron M, Kitchen K, Tipl er S, Pope D, et al. Patients' perceptions 
of fatigue in rheumatoid arthritis: overwhelming, u ncontrollable, ignored. Arthritis Care 
Res 2005;53:697-702. 
5. Repping-Wuts H, Uitterhoeve R, van Riel P, van A chterberg T. Fatigue as experienced by 
patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA): a qualitat ive study. Int J Nurs Stud 2008;45:995-
1002. 
6. Nikolaus S, Bode C, Taal E, van de Laar MAFJ. Ne w insights into the experience of fatigue 
among patients with rheumatoid arthritis: a qualita tive study. Ann Rheum Dis 
2010;69:895-897. 
7. Dittner AJ, Wessely SC, Brown RG. The assessment  of fatigue. A practical guide for 
clinicians and researchers. J Psychosom Res 2004;56 :157–70. 
8. Hewlett S, Hehir M, Kirwan JR. Measuring fatigue  in rheumatoid arthritis: a systematic 
review of scales in use. Arthritis Rheum 2007;57:42 9–39. 
9. Repping-Wuts H, van Riel P, van Achterberg T. Fa tigue in patients with rheumatoid 
arthritis: what is known and what is needed. Rheuma tology 2009;48:207-209. 
10. Hewlett S, Nicklin J, Treharne GJ. Fatigue in m usculoskeletal conditions. Topical 
Reviews Series 6: No 1. Arthritis Campaign: Autumn 2008 www.arc.org.uk/ 
arthinfo/medpubs/6641/6641.asp (1 December 2009, da te last accessed). 
11. Hewlett S, Chalder T, Choy E, Cramp F, Davis B,  Dures E, et al. Fatigue in rheumatoid 
arthritis: time for a conceptual model. Rheumatolog y 2011;50:1004-1006.  
12. Stebbings S, Treharne GJ. Fatigue in rheumatic disease: an overview. Int J Clin 
Rheumatol 2010;5(4):487-502. 
13. Hewlett S, Dures E, Almeida C. Measures of fati gue. Arthritis Care Res 2011;63:S263-
S286. 
14. Nikolaus S, Bode C, Taal E, van de Laar MAFJ. W hich dimensions of fatigue should be 
measured in patients with rheumatoid arthritis? – A  Delphi study. Musculoskeletal Care. 
Published online 11 November 2011. doi: 10.1002/msc .222 62 15. Hewlett S, Dures E, Almeida C. Measures of Fati gue. Arthritis Care Res, 2011;63,S263-
S286. Doi 10.1002/acr.20579. 
16. Mahowald MW, Mahowald ML, Bundlie SR, Ytterberg  SR. Sleep fragmentation in 
rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Rheum 1989;32:974-9 83. 
17. Higgins JPT, Green S (ed.). Cochrane handbook f or systematic reviews of interventions. 
Version 5.0.2. John Wiley & Sons Ltd; 2009. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
63 List of included studies 
 
1)  Belza BL, Henke CJ, Yelin EH, Epstein WV, Gilliss C L. Correlates of fatigue in older 
adults with rheumatoid arthritis. Nursing Research 1993;42(2): 93-99. 
2)  Bergman MJ, Shahouri SS, Shaver TS, Anderson JD, We idensaul DN, Busch RE, 
Weng S, Wolfe F. Is Fatigue an Inflammatory Variabl e in Rheumatoid Arthritis 
(RA)? Analyses of Fatigue in RA, Osteoarthritis, an d Fibromyalgia. J Rheumatol 
2009;36:2788-2794. 
3)  Contreras-Yanez I, Cabiedes J, Villa AR, Rull-Gabay et M, Pascual-Ramos V. 
Persistence on therapy is a major determinant of pa tient-, physician- and 
laboratory-reported outcomes in recent-onset rheuma toid arthritis patients. Clin 
Exp Rheumatol 2010;28:748-751. 
4)  Davis MC, Zautra AJ, Younger J, Motivala SJ, Attrep  J, Irwin MR. Chronic stress and 
regulation of cellular markers of inflammation in r heumatoid arthritis: 
Implications for fatigue. Brain Behav Immun 2008;22 :24-32. 
5)  Davis MC, Okun MA, Kruszewski D, Zautra AJ, Tennen H. Sex Differences in the 
Relations of Positive and Negative Daily Events and  Fatigue in Adults With 
Rheumatoid Arthritis. Journal of Pain 2010;11:1338- 1347. 
6)  Dhir V, Lawrence A, Aggarwal A, Misra R. Fibromyalg ia is common and adversely 
affects pain and fatigue perception in North Indian  patients with rheumatoid 
arthritis. J Rheumatol 2009;36:2443-2448. 
7)  Fifield J, McQuillan J, Tennen H, Sheehan J, Reisin e S, Hesselbrock V, Rothfield N. 
History of affective disorder and the temporal traj ectory of fatigue in rheumatoid 
arthritis. Ann Behav Med 2001;23:34-41. 
8)  Finan PH, Okun MA, Kruszewski D, Davis MC, Zautra A J, Tennen H. Interplay of 
Concurrent Positive and Negative Interpersonal Even ts in the Prediction of Daily 
Negative Affect and Fatigue for Rheumatoid Arthriti s Patients. Health Psychology 
2010;29:429-437. 
9)  Van Hoogmoed D, Fransen J, Bleijenberg G, van Riel P. Physical and psychosocial 
correlates of severe fatigue in rheumatoid arthriti s. Rheumatology 2010;49:1294-
1302. 
10)  Huyser BA, Parker JC, Thoreson R, Smarr KL, Johnson  JC, Hoffman R. Predictors of 
subjective fatigue among individuals with rheumatoi d arthritis. Arthritis Rheum 
1998;41:2230-2237. 64 11)  Jump RL, Fifield J, Tennen H, Reisine S, Giuliano A J. History of Affective Disorder 
and the Experience of Fatigue in Rheumatoid Arthrit is. Arthritis Rheum: Arthritis 
Care Res 2004;51:239-245. 
12)  Mancuso CA, Rincon M, Sayles W, Paget SA. Psychosoc ial variables and fatigue: A 
longitudinal study comparing individuals with rheum atoid arthritis and healthy 
controls. J Rheumatol 2006;33:1496-1502. 
13)  Odegard S, Kvien TK, Uhlig T. Incidence of clinical ly important 10-year health 
status and disease activity levels in population-ba sed cohorts with rheumatoid 
arthritis. J Rheumatol 2008;35:54-60. 
14)  Parrish BP, Zautra AJ, Davis MC. The Role of Positi ve and Negative Interpersonal 
Events on Daily Fatigue in Women With Fibromyalgia,  Rheumatoid Arthritis, and 
Osteoarthritis. Health Psychology 2008;27: 694-702.  
15)  Pollard LC, Choy EH, Gonzalez J, Khoshaba B, Scott DL. Fatigue in rheumatoid 
arthritis reflects pain, not disease activity. Rheu matology 2006;45:885-889. 
16)  Repping-Wuts H, Fransen J, van Achterberg T, Bleije nberg G, van Riel P. Persistent 
severe fatigue in patients with rheumatoid arthriti s. J Clin Nurs 2007;16:377-383. 
17)  Riemsma RP, Rasker JJ, Taal E, Griep EN, Wouters JM GW, Wiegman O. Fatigue in 
rheumatoid arthritis: the role of self-efficacy and  problematic social support. Br J 
Rheumatol 1998;37:1042-1046. 
18)  Scharloo M, Kaptein AA, Weinman JA, Hazes JMW, Bree dveld FC, Rooijmans 
HGM. Predicting functional status in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. J 
Rheumatol 1999;26:1686-1693. 
19)  Sokka T, Toloza S, Cutolo M, Kautiainen H, Makinen H, Gogus F, et al. Women, 
men, and rheumatoid arthritis: Analyses of disease activity, disease 
characteristics, and treatments in the QUEST-RA Stu dy. Arthritis Res Ther 
2009;11:R7. 
20)  Stebbings S, Herbison P, Doyle TCH, Treharne GJ, Hi ghton J. A comparison of 
fatigue correlates in rheumatoid arthritis and oste oarthritis: disparity in 
associations with disability, anxiety and sleep dis turbance. Rheumatology 
(Oxford) 2010;49:361-367. 
21)  Stone AA, Broderick JE, Porter LS, Kaell AT. The ex perience of rheumatoid arthritis 
pain and fatigue: examining momentary reports and c orrelates over one week. 
Arthritis Care Res 1997;10:185-193.  
65 22)  Thyberg I, Dahlström Ö, Thyberg M. Factors related to fatigue in women and men 
with early rheumatoid arthritis: The swedish TIRA s tudy. J Rehabil Med 
2009;41:904-912. 
23)  Treharne GJ, Lyons AC, Hale ED, Goodchild CE, Booth  DA, Kitas GD. Predictors of 
fatigue over 1 year among people with rheumatoid ar thritis. Psychology Health 
Med 2008;13:494-504. 
24)  Wolfe F, Hawley DJ, Wilson K. The prevalence and me aning of fatigue in 
rheumatic disease. J Rheumatol 1996;23:1407-1417. 
25)  Breedveld FC, Han C, Bala M, van der Heijde D, Bake r D, Kavanaugh AF, Maini RN, 
Lipsky PE. Association between baseline radiographi c damage and improvement 
in physical function after treatment of patients wi th rheumatoid arthritis. Ann 
Rheum Dis 2005;64:52-55. 
26)  Chorus AMJ, Miedema HS, Boonen A, van der Linden SJ . Quality of life and work 
in patients with rheumatoid arthritis and ankylosin g spondylitis of working age. 
Ann Rheum Dis 2003;62:1178-1184. 
27)  Covic T, Tyson G, Spencer D, Howe G. Depression in rheumatoid arthritis patients: 
demographic, clinical, and psychological predictors . J Psychosom Res 
2006;60:469-476. 
28)  De Croon EM, Sluiter JK, Nijssen TF, Kammeijer M, D ijkmans BAC, Lankhorst GJ, 
Frings-Dresen MHW. Work ability of Dutch employees with rheumatoid arthritis. 
Scand J Rheumatol 2005;34:277-283. 
29)  Davis MC, Affleck G, Zautra AJ, Tennen H. Daily int erpersonal events in pain 
patients: Applying action theory to chronic illness . J Clin Psychol 2006;62:1097-
1113. 
30)  Katz PP. The stresses of rheumatoid arthritis: Appr aisals of perceived impact and 
coping efficacy. Arthritis Care Res 1998;11:9-22. 
31)  Parker White C, White MB, Fox MA. Maternal fatigue and its relationship to the 
caregiving environment. Fam Syst Health 2009;27:325 -345. 
32)  Rupp I, Boshuizen HC, Jacobi CE, Dinant HJ, van den  Bos GAM. Impact of fatigue 
on health-related quality of life in rheumatoid art hritis. Arthritis Care Res 
2004;51:578-85. 
33)  Smedstad LM, Moum T, Vaglum P, Kvien TK. The Impact  of Early Rheumatoid 
Arthritis on Psychological Distress: A comparison b etween 238 patients with RA 
and 116 matched controls. Scandinavian J Rheumatol 1996;25:377-382. 66 34)  Waltz M. The disease process and utilization of hea lth services in rheumatoid 
arthritis: The relative contributions of various ma rkers of disease severity in 
explaining consumption patterns. Arthritis Care Res  2000;13:74-88. 
35)  Wolfe F, Michaud K, Pincus T. Fatigue, rheumatoid a rthritis, and anti-tumor 
necrosis factor therapy: an investigation in 24,831  patients. J Rheumatol 
2004;31:2115-20. 
36)  Wolfe F, Michaud K. Prevalence, risk, and risk fact ors for oral and ocular dryness 
with particular emphasis on rheumatoid arthritis. J  Rheumatol 2008;35:1023-
1030. 
37)  Wolfe F, Michaud K. Proposed metrics for the determ ination of rheumatoid 
arthritis outcome and treatment success and failure . J Rheumatol 2009;36:27-33. 
38)  Wolfe F, Michaud K. Predicting depression in rheuma toid arthritis: The signal 
importance of pain extent and fatigue, and comorbid ity. Arthritis Care Res 
2009;61:667-673. 
39)  Yazici Y, Pincus T, Kautiainen H, Sokka T. Morning stiffness in patients with early 
rheumatoid arthritis is associated more strongly wi th functional disability than 
with joint swelling and erythrocyte sedimentation r ate. J Rheumatol 
2004;31:1723-1726. 
40)  Belza BL. Comparison of self-reported fatigue in rh eumatoid arthritis and 
controls. J Rheumatol 1995;22:639-643. 
41)  Crosby LJ. Factors which contribute to fatigue asso ciated with rheumatoid 
arthritis. J Adv Nurs 1991;16:974-981. 
42)  Currey SS, Rao JK, Winfield JB, Callahan LF. Perfor mance of a Generic Health-
Related Quality of Life Measure in a Clinic Populat ion With Rheumatic Disease. 
Arthritis Care Res2003;49:658-664. 
43)  Goodchild CE, Treharne GJ, Booth DA, Kitas GD, Bowm an SJ. Measuring fatigue 
among women with Sjogren's syndrome or rheumatoid a rthritis: a comparison of 
the Profile of Fatigue (ProF) and the Multidimensio nal Fatigue Inventory (MFI). 
Musculoskeletal Care 2008;6:31-48. 
44)  Goodchild CE, Treharne GJ, Booth DA, Bowman SJ. Day time patterning of fatigue 
and its associations with the previous night's disc omfort and poor sleep among 
women with primary Sjögren's syndrome or rheumatoid  arthritis. 
Musculoskeletal Care 2010;8:107-117.  
67 45)  van Oers ML, Bossema ER, Thoolen BJ, Hartkamp A, De kkers JC, Godaert GLR, 
Kruize AA, Derksen RHWM, Bijlsma JWJ, Geenen R. Var iability of fatigue during 
the day in patients with primary Sjögren's syndrome , systemic lupus 
erythematosus, and rheumatoid arthritis. Clin Exp R heumatol 2010;28:715-721. 
46)  Reading SR, Crowson CS, Rodeheffer RJ, Fitz-Gibbon PD, Maradit-Kremers H, 
Gabriel SE. Do rheumatoid arthritis patients have a  higher risk for sleep apnea? J 
Rheumatol 2009;36:1869-1872. 
47)  Salaffi F, Sarzi Puttini P, Girolimetti R, Atzeni F , Gasparini S, Grassi W. Helath-
related quality of life in fibromyalgia patients: a  comparison with rheumatoid 
arthritis patients and the general population using  the SF-36 health survey. 
Experimental Rheumatology 2009;27:S67-S74. 
48)  Wolfe F, Michaud K. Severe rheumatoid arthritis (RA ), worse outcomes, comorbid 
illness, and sociodemographic disadvantage characte rize ra patients with 
fibromyalgia. J Rheumatol 2004;31:695-700. 
49)  Zautra AJ, Fasman R, Parish BP, Davis MC. Daily fat igue in women with 
osteoarthritis, rheumatoid arthritis, and fibromyal gia. Pain 2007;128:128-135. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 68 APPENDIX Search strategy in the databases 
 
 
MEDLINE: 
 
"Fatigue"[Mesh] AND ("Models, Theoretical"[Mesh] OR  "Causality"[Mesh] OR 
"etiology"[Subheading]) AND "Musculoskeletal Diseas es"[Mesh]  
 
Web of Science: 
Topic=((fatigue OR tiredness) SAME (model* OR theor * OR framework OR predict* OR 
etiology OR pathophysiology OR factor*)) AND Topic= (rheum* OR arthritis OR 
musculoskeletal OR joint disease)  
 
SCOPUS: 
Fatigue w/15 model* AND rheum* OR arthritis OR musc uloskeletal OR joint disease, 
Fatigue w/15 theor* AND rheum* OR arthritis OR musc uloskeletal OR joint disease, 
Fatigue w/15 framework AND rheum* OR arthritis OR m usculoskeletal OR joint disease, 
Fatigue w/15 predict* AND rheum* OR arthritis OR mu sculoskeletal OR joint disease, 
Fatigue w/15 etiology AND rheum* OR arthritis OR mu sculoskeletal OR joint disease, 
Fatigue w/15 pathophysiology AND rheum* OR arthriti s OR musculoskeletal OR joint 
disease, Fatigue w/15 factor* AND rheum* OR arthrit is OR musculoskeletal OR joint 
disease  
The same search was done with the word “tiredness” instead of “fatigue”. 
 
PsychInfo: 
((fatigue N15 model*) OR (tiredness N15 model*) OR (fatigue N15 theor*) OR (tiredness 
N15 theor*) OR (fatigue N15 framework) OR (tirednes s N15 framework) OR (fatigue N15 
predict*) OR (tiredness N15 predict*) OR (fatigue N 15 etiology) OR (tiredness N15 
etiology) OR (fatigue N15 pathophysiology) OR (tire dness N15 pathophysiology) OR 
(fatigue N15 factor*) OR (tiredness N15 factor*)) a nd (rheum* OR arthritis OR 
musculoskeletal OR joint disease )    
 
 
 
  
69  
 
 
Chapter 3 
 
 
 
Measuring fatigue in rheumatoid arthritis 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S. Nikolaus 
M.A.F.J. van de Laar 
 
Nat Rev Rheumatol 2011 Aug 30;7(10):562-4. Advance online publication 30 August 2011;  
doi:10.1038/ nrrheum.2011.124  70 Irksome to debilitating, fatigue is a frequent symp tom of rheumatoid arthritis (RA). 
Patients regard it as an important, neglected facet  of the disease. An analysis of the effect 
of biologic therapies on fatigue has yielded disapp ointing results—do current treatments 
lack efficacy, or are we failing to measure adequat e parameters? 
 
When TNF-blockers were introduced into clinical pra ctice, many patients anecdotally 
reported a meaningful reduction in fatigue. As fati gue is experienced as one of the most 
important symptoms of RA, such unsystematic observa tions were noted with interest. 
Today, fatigue is regarded as an important patient- reported outcome measure in 
rheumatology, 1 and is increasingly measured in clinical trials. T his trend is reflected in the 
publication, by Chauffier et al. 2 in Rheumatology (Oxford),  of a meta-analysis of the effects 
of biologic agents on fatigue in patients with RA. Forming one of the first concrete 
answers to the expectations and hopes that rest on biologic therapies to tackle this 
symptom, the results are disappointing. 2  
 
Patients with RA frequently report feeling unable t o control fatigue, and that the symptom 
is mostly neglected by clinicians when evaluating t he severity and treatment of the 
disease. Moreover, patients consider fatigue to be an annoying symptom with far-
reaching consequences. 3 The experience of fatigue is multidimensional: it manifests not 
only as a physical sensation, but also in emotional  and cognitive ways. Accordingly, fatigue 
has a serious impact on many different areas of dai ly life; for example, it is an important 
predictor of work productivity. 4  
 
Thus, the analysis by Chauffier and colleagues, 2 which included 10 randomized controlled 
trials, is an anticlimax to the hopes invested in b iologic therapies, reporting that the 
impact of such treatments on fatigue is small, and comparable to their effects on physical 
functioning. 
 
Two main scenarios might explain the disappointing effect sizes calculated. Firstly, 
biotherapies might be inefficacious for treating fa tigue in RA. If so, the cause could be 
either that they do not have an effect on the mecha nisms that underlie fatigue, or that 
their effects are limited to only some of the relev ant pathways, which are eclipsed by 
those mechanisms that remain unaffected. Alternativ ely, it could be that biotherapies do 
have effects on fatigue in RA, but that we are unab le to measure them.  
 
The first of these hypotheses is not yet provable i n its simplest form, as we lack sufficient 
knowledge of the causes and pathways of fatigue and  RA (and of fatigue in RA). As  
71 patients with RA mention fatigue as a specific feat ure of their disease, it is plausible that 
RA and fatigue have some mechanisms in common. Neve rtheless, fatigue in RA might be 
driven by processes other than the immunological pa thways that drive other symptoms of 
the disease. As a consequence, medication directed at the immune system alone would 
not lead to measurable reduction in fatigue. The re lationship between fatigue and 
inflammation in RA is not yet clear, as underlined by a recent review 5 that discussed 
studies with conflicting results: some investigator s have demonstrated a correlation 
between fatigue and inflammatory markers in RA, whe reas others have found no such 
associations, reflecting the complexity of the link s between disease activity and fatigue in 
RA. Plausibly, therefore, we can assume multi-causa lity of fatigue; physical components 
might be involved, but psychological processes migh t also play a part in the etiology. 6 
 
The physical component of fatigue is likely to be s ubject to modification by biologic 
agents, via a reduction in inflammatory processes. Improvements in pain and sleep would 
lead to a reduction in fatigue. However, the psycho logical component will be more 
difficult to influence, because reactions to the ex perience of a disease symptom—such as 
avoidance behaviors, feelings of helplessness and/o r depressive mood—can become 
habitual. Such unconscious behaviors and attributio ns can be, or can become, 
independent of current levels of inflammation and p ain, and no longer controllable by 
medication. Thus, medication alone is probably not enough to control fatigue; additional 
patient education, behavioral change and cognitive restructuring components are needed; 
for example, in the form of group cognitive–behavio ral therapy. 7  
 
Another explanation for the disappointing conclusio n of the meta-anlaysis 2 concerns 
measurement. When we are unable to measure fatigue appropriately we cannot evaluate 
it adequately—the measurement of fatigue is an issu e in itself. Several multi-item 
questionnaires are used in clinical practice and re search, but they all have shortcomings. 
Indeed, a systematic review of measurements of fati gue in RA showed that reasonable 
evidence of their validity in the disease exists fo r only a few of them. 8 Furthermore, none 
met all criteria for validity. 8 The main problem identified was content validity: the 
perspective of patients with RA was not included du ring development of the measures.  
All studies that were included in the analysis by C hauffier et al. 2 used the Short Form 36 
(SF ‑36) vitality subscale and/or the Functional Assessm ent of Chronic Illness Therapy 
Fatigue Scale (FACIT ‑F). Whether these two scales are the most appropria te for the 
measurement of fatigue in RA is disputable. Both me asures have shown some validity, 8 
but might be open to distortion when used in popula tions of patients with RA. The vitality 
subscale of the SF ‑36, a generic scale, might not be able to different iate well between 72 depression and fatigue. 8 Moreover, one must question whether vitality and f atigue reflect 
a one-dimensional construct. The FACIT ‑F was originally developed to measure fatigue in 
patients with cancer, and some items might reflect physically disabling symptoms of RA, 
rather than fatigue. To ensure content validity of a measurement instrument, canvassing 
the opinion of patients and professionals in the fi eld is essential during development. 9 
Only patients can report on the experience of fatig ue.  
The Bristol RA Fatigue Multi-Dimensional Questionna ire (BRAF-MDQ) is a recently devised 
fatigue questionnaire that was not used in any of t he studies analyzed by Chauffier and 
colleagues. 2 Its approach is promising, as it embraces the pati ent’s perspective by 
developing items based on interviews, focus groups and cognitive testing. Nevertheless, 
the BRAF-MDQ is a traditional instrument, meaning t hat a fixed number of items have to 
be filled in by each patient.  
By contrast, computer-adaptive testing (CAT) is a n ew technology that allows 
comprehensive measurement of patient-reported outco mes (PROs) with relatively few 
items. 10  Items are respectively selected from an item bank,  based on a patient’s previous 
answer, so that precise measurement at individual l evel with few items becomes possible. 
By using Item Response Theory, items can ideally be  matched to the patient’s individual 
level, and inter-individual comparisons of the meas ured construct can be made, even if 
patients filled in different items. Primarily, CAT was developed and has been used for 
ability and achievement testing. To date, few CAT a pplications have been validated and 
implemented in medical settings, but interest in CA T for health-related measures is 
growing. 10  CATs constructed recently to measure depression an d anxiety seem to be 
reliable, valid and efficient instruments that are more precise than traditional 
questionnaires. 10  Moreover, as they are shorter, the burden for pati ents is reduced. None 
of the studies included in the Rheumatology (Oxford)  paper 2 used this type of assessment; 
a CAT for fatigue in RA is not yet available, but w ill be developed in the near future. 
Potentially, this promising technology might contri bute to a better measurement of 
fatigue in RA and mean that the effects of treatmen t can be demonstrated more clearly in 
the future.  
 
The meta-analysis of the effect of biotherapies on fatigue in patients with RA by Chauffier 
et al. 2 clearly shows that measuring and treating fatigue in RA are major problems. Either 
our current treatments are insufficient to influenc e one of the major outcomes of the RA 
disease process, or we are unable to measure RA ‑associated fatigue in itself.  
 
 
  
73 ACKNOWLEDGEMENT  
 
The authors wish to thank Dr Christina Bode of the Arthritis Center Twente at the 
University of Twente, the Netherlands, for substant ial contributions to discussions during 
the preparation of this article.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 74 REFERENCES 
 
1. Kirwan JR, Minnock P, Adebajo A, Bresnihan B, Ch oy, de Wit M, et al. Patient 
perspective: fatigue as a recommended patient cente red outcome measure in rheumatoid 
arthritis. J Rheumatol 2007;34:1174–1177.  
2. Chauffier K, Salliot C, Berenbaum F, Sellam J. E ffect of biotherapies on fatigue in 
rheumatoid arthritis: a systematic review of the li terature and meta-analysis. 
Rheumatology (Oxford) 2012;51:60-8. doi:10.1093/rhe umatology/ker162.  
3. Nikolaus S, Bode C, Taal E, van de Laar MAFJ. Ne w insights into the experience of fatigue 
among patients with rheumatoid arthritis: a qualita tive study. Ann Rheum Dis 
2010;69:895–897.  
4. De Croon EM, Sluiter JK, Nijssen TF, Kammeijer M , Dijkmans BA, Lankhorst GJ, et al. 
Work ability of Dutch employees with rheumatoid art hritis. Scand J Rheumatol 
2005;34:277–283.  
5. Stebbings S, Treharne GJ. Fatigue in rheumatic d iseases: an overview. Int J Clin 
Rheumatol 2010;5:487–502.  
6. Norheim KB, Jonsson G, Omdal R. Biological mecha nisms of chronic fatigue. 
Rheumatology (Oxford) 2011;50:1009–1018.  
7. Hewlett S, Ambler N, Almeida C, Cliss A, Hammond  A, Kitchen K, et al. Self-management 
of fatigue in rheumatoid arthritis: a randomised co ntrolled trial of group cognitive-
behavioural therapy. Ann Rheum Dis 2011;70:1060–106 7.  
8. Hewlett S, Hehir M, Kirwan JR. Measuring fatigue  in rheumatoid arthritis: a systematic 
review of scales in use. Arthritis Rheum 2007;57:42 9–439.  
9. Streiner DL, Norman GR. Devising the items. In: Streiner DL, Norman GR eds. Health 
measurement scales—a practical guide to their devel opment and use. New York: Oxford 
University Press, 2003:14-28.  
10. Walter OB. Adaptive tests for measuring anxiety  and depression. In: WJ van der 
Linden, CAW Glas eds. Elements of Adaptive Testing.  New York, Springer, 2010:123-126.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
75  
 
 
Chapter 4 
 
 
 
New insights into the experience of fatigue among p atients with 
rheumatoid arthritis: a qualitative study 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S. Nikolaus 
C. Bode 
E. Taal 
M.A.F.J. van de Laar 
 
Ann Rheum Dis 2010;69:895–897. doi:10.1136/ard.2009 .118067 895  
 76 ABSTRACT  
 
Objectives  Patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) commonly e xperience fatigue. The aim 
of this study was to gain further insight into the experience of fatigue in RA.  
Methods  Participants were 31 outpatients with RA of Medica l Spectrum Twente, 
Enschede, The Netherlands, with all levels of fatig ue. In-depth structured interviews on 
the patients’ experience of fatigue were conducted and analysed using a bottom-up 
coding scheme, meaning that answers of patients wer e summarised and categorised.  
Results  Patients’ mean fatigue severity score was 50 (visu al analogue scale (VAS); 
theoretical range 0–100). Interviews showed interin dividual differences in the experience 
and impact of fatigue. Different patterns in emotio ns, consequences and management of 
fatigue were found. Especially younger women with m ultiple daily roles seemed to be 
vulnerable to the negative impact of RA fatigue. Pa tients also reported positive aspects of 
fatigue. Moreover, varying forms of fatigue were de scribed.  
Conclusions  Results point to the existence of differences in f atigue experience according 
to gender, age and daily roles. This finding indica tes a need for targeting advice and 
interventions to the individual situation of a pati ent. Furthermore, the positive aspects 
patients reported about their fatigue could facilit ate an approach that is focused on 
remaining opportunities and not just on restriction s.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
77 INTRODUCTION 
 
Patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) mention fat igue as one of their most bothersome 
symptoms. 1 An internationally accepted definition of fatigue in RA does not exist, 2 and 
little is known about its aetiology and the possibi lities for support by health 
professionals. 3,4  Three studies on the experience of fatigue in RA 5–7 showed that fatigue is 
a multidimensional, bothersome symptom with far-rea ching consequences. However, 
these results were found in small or highly selecti ve samples 5,7  or with predetermined 
coding schemes. 6 These studies give a first explorative insight int o the experience of RA 
fatigue, but did not address differences between pa tients in their descriptions of fatigue. 
As the subjective experience of a symptom is always  influenced by an interaction of 
several individual patient characteristics, 8 we were interested in intraindividual 
differences in the experience of RA fatigue. Patien ts with osteoarthritis have reported 
varying forms of fatigue, making a distinction betw een physical and mental fatigue. 9 
Hence we were interested whether fatigue experience  differs between patients with RA 
and whether one patient can have different experien ces of fatigue.  
 
 
PATIENTS AND METHODS  
 
In February and March 2008, consecutive outpatients  visiting the rheumatology clinic of 
Medical Spectrum Twente, Enschede, The Netherlands,  were invited to participate. 
Selection criterion was a diagnosis of RA minimally  2 years ago, so that patients were able 
to talk about a certain amount of experience with R A fatigue. Interested patients received 
an information letter about the study and made an a ppointment with the interviewer 
(SN). Patients completed a questionnaire via a comp uter with touch screen at the hospital. 
More information about the methods can be found in appendix 1.  
 
Interviews 
The interviewer (SN) used a hierarchical interview scheme comprising eight main topics 
(table 1) with several subquestions. The interview scheme was based on the interview 
schedules used in the previous interview studies 5,7  and a literature search on fatigue 
models.  
 
 
 
 78 Table 1  Interview topics 
Topic    Example question 
(1) Personal situation and   - What are your daily activities? 
disease-related information 
(2) Manifestation of fatigue  - How often are you f atigued? 
(3) Experience of fatigue  - How would you describe your fatigue? 
(4) Determinants of fatigue  - According to your op inion, what causes your fatigue? 
(5) Consequences of fatigue  - What are the consequ ences of fatigue for your daily life? 
(6) Coping with fatigue  - How do you deal with you r fatigue? 
(7) Support by others (personal and  - What kind of  things do other people do to professional) 
    lessen your fatigue? 
(8) Additional comments  -Is there anything I did n ot ask you about your fatigue that you 
would like to add? 
 
 
Analyses  
We used an approach that combines deductive and ind uctive elements of analysis. This 
approach is similar to the framework approach, 10  but the deductive element is slightly 
more dominant. All interviews were recorded on audi otape and transcribed verbatim. 
After careful reading of the interviews by three re searchers (SN, CB, ET), a coding scheme 
was developed bottom-up, meaning that the answers o f patients were summarised and 
categorised, without using predetermined categories . With some new codes emerging 
during the coding process, previously coded intervi ews were checked for them. Three 
researchers (SN, CB, ET) coded 10% of the interview s to check the inter-rater reliability. 
Kappa values were calculated for each interview que stion. The mean value of 0.63 was 
sufficient. 11  Statements with different codes were discussed unt il full consensus was 
reached.  
 
 
 
RESULTS  
 
Sample  
The sample consisted of 31 outpatients; 8 men and 2 3 women with a mean age of 58 
years (SD=13.78), ranging from 32 to 83. Further sa mple characteristics are shown in 
appendix 2. In the following paragraph, we present our qualitative results with focus on 
meaning and description of fatigue. Appendix 3 also  contains further information about 
striking differences between patients.  
 
  
79 Interindividual differences  
Negative emotions related to fatigue  
Most negative emotions were reported by women patie nts. Only two men mentioned 
unpleasant emotions at all: slightly worsened mood and feeling useless. Women reported 
“being oversensitive, becoming irritated more quick ly, not being able to deal with things 
or being catty”, being angry, being in a bad or dep ressive mood, feeling miserable, 
rebellious, unpleasant, sad, down, despondent, frus trated, aggressive, anxious, self-pitying 
or misunderstood. “Well, if you’re really tired, yo u’re just angry with yourself. (…) That 
you’re tired again. You don’t want to be, but you a re. (…)” (respondent (R) 13, woman, 39 
years old, mother, spouse, housewife, employee). It  was remarkable that especially 
younger women with multiple daily roles experienced  negative emotions related to 
fatigue.  
Consequences of fatigue  
Most patients reported fatigue having consequences for daily life; they felt impeded in 
their mobility and activities. Only a few older pat ients (>67 years) reported no 
consequences at all. Many patients felt restricted by fatigue in housekeeping and 
gardening. “Yes, that you can’t get on with things like you used to. That you just have to 
rest more (…) that you have to become more easygoin g about your work. That everything 
here doesn’t sparkle or shine like a new pin, and y es, you just have to learn to accept it” 
(R3, woman, 52, mother, spouse, housewife, employee ). No man, but several women 
reported consequences for social contacts, for exam ple, having to cancel appointments 
because of fatigue. For some women helping and supp orting others became more 
difficult, and some women experienced stress from f atigue. Several women reported 
work-related consequences, for example, being unabl e to work (in a certain job), or being 
tired during work.  
Coping with fatigue  
Only women reported that their ability to successfu lly cope with fatigue was variable. 
“Yes, it can vary; it depends on how I feel. Someti mes I accept it, but other times I can’t; I 
can get angry, rebellious” (R32, woman, 55, spouse,  housewife, employee). No man 
reported having to dose activities and find a balan ce, but several women did. “Yes, I used 
to work full time, on top of the housekeeping and t he children, you just did it. And now 
you have to plan what you’re going to do, which mea ns there are some things you can’t. 
Ah, your entire day revolves around it and spent th inking how you’re going to get through 
the day” (R1, woman, 44, mother, spouse, housewife,  employee).  
 
 
 80 Different forms of fatigue  
Some patients reported varying fatigue experiences.  They distinguished between mental 
and physical fatigue, fatigue with or without a pri or reason (such as poor sleep or physical 
activity), fatigue in combination with or without p ain, with or without dizziness and with 
or without the desire to go to bed and sleep. “Arou nd quarter to 11 I start to yawn, and 
want to go to bed. Right, but that’s not the kind o f tiredness I feel at 3 in the afternoon. 
(…) I don’t want to go to bed. Then it’s just sitti ng and being so tired you can’t even put 
your cup down on the table” (R7, woman, 65). Furthe rmore, patients described 
differences between forms of fatigue based on sever ity, frequency or duration.  
Most patients had difficulties to specify at least one of the following points: how severe 
the fatigue is, how often the fatigue occurs and ho w long it lasts. Patients thought the 
reason was that fatigue is not always the same. “I have weeks in which I’m really tired for 
3 or 4 days. And I have weeks that are fine. (…) Bu t it depends of course on what you’re 
doing, what the circumstances are; even the weather  can have an effect” (R6, woman, 59).  
 
Benefit finding  
Some patients saw positive aspects of fatigue, as m aking more conscious decisions in life 
“You just go about things a bit differently and you  make more conscious decisions about 
what is really important. (…) That’s the positive s ide of it. Normally I would probably have 
just gone on racing about doing all sorts of things , but now you just think about it more” 
(R14, woman, 42), learning to let things go “I’m su re you also learn from it that not 
everything is so important that you have to do ever ything you want to. That you can also 
just give in and leave things as they are. (…) Of c ourse I’m lucky that I don’t have a busy 
job, so it’s easy for me to give in. (…)” (R6, woma n, 59), or learning to appreciate the 
beneficial aspects of rest “Undoubtedly, because yo u come to rest. (...) rest is a natural 
phenomenon I think, which is good for humans. So it  [the fatigue] will undoubtedly have 
positive aspects” (R5, man, 68). Patients also repo rted that fatigue can make daily life 
easier; being able to fall asleep easier than befor e, that the boss can see when one is 
really tired and being able to use fatigue as an ex cuse.  
 
 
DISCUSSION  
 
This is the first study showing interindividual and  intraindividual differences in the 
patients’ experience of RA fatigue, and that fatigu e can also have benefits for patients as 
well. Compared to men, women reported gender-specif ic coping patterns, more negative 
emotions and more consequences of fatigue. This app lied especially to younger women  
81 with multiple daily roles (eg, spouse, employee, ho usekeeping, childcare). In contrast, only 
older patients reported no consequences of fatigue at all. In this study, fewer men than 
women participated, which may reduce the generalisa bility of the results. However, the 
spreading of the sample almost corresponds to the e pidemiological distribution in RA. 12  
We obtained information about daily roles from demo graphic data and asking patients 
about their daily activities. For future fatigue re search we recommend to comprehensively 
measure daily roles, because it seems likely that n ot gender and age as such are 
associated with the experience of fatigue, but the amount of daily roles. Compared to 
men, women more often fulfil multiple roles in dail y life. 13,14  After retirement, people have 
fewer roles, 15  and expectations from others are less demanding. T herefore women might 
feel more restricted by fatigue than men, and older  people might be able to cope with 
fatigue more easily. Women reported managing fatigu e by dosing and planning their 
activities to find a balance between activity and r est. Negative emotions related to fatigue 
might occur when personal possibilities do not meet  with one’s expectations and wishes, 
and might be worsened by external demands related t o multiple roles. Consequently, to 
reduce or prevent negative emotions, adjustment of personal goals and standards as well 
as negotiating external demands might be a good str ategy. 16,17  Moreover, developing or 
strengthening an awareness of positive fatigue aspe cts, could be valuable in reducing 
negative emotions. Previous interview studies did n ot report beneficial aspects of fatigue, 
probably because the patients were not asked about it. However, their existence is of 
special importance since the ability to find someth ing beneficial in a negative experience 
can lead to improvements in adaptation and health. 18  In daily clinical practice 
professionals should have a supportive attitude to allow patients to discuss their fatigue, 
because its description can be difficult due to var ious forms and variations in severity, 
frequency and duration. A theoretical, comprehensiv e model explaining the experience of 
RA fatigue is still lacking. 19  In future research, the dimensions of RA fatigue a nd possibly 
related patient characteristics should be examined in more detail. This study was 
qualitative, and did not test hypotheses about diff erences between patients. However, 
our data show new indications for the existence of such differences in the experience and 
description of RA fatigue. These new results could inform future quantitative research. 
The results of this study point to the relevance fo r an individualised professional approach 
and a precise measurement of fatigue in patients wi th rheumatoid arthritis. The positive 
aspects patients reported about their fatigue could  facilitate an approach that is focused 
on remaining opportunities and not just on restrict ions.  
 
 
 82 ACKNOWLEDGEMENT  
 
We would like to thank the patients with RA who par ticipated in this study.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
83 REFERENCES  
 
1. Hewlett S, Carr M, Ryan S, et al. Outcomes gener ated by patients with rheumatoid 
arthritis: how important are they? Musculoskeletal Care 2005;3:131–42.  
2. Hewlett S, Hehir M, Kirwan JR. Measuring fatigue  in rheumatoid arthritis: a systematic 
review of scales in use. Arthritis Rheum 2007;57:42 9–39.  
3. Swain MG. Fatigue in chronic disease. Clin Sci 2 000;99:1–8.  
4. Repping-Wuts H, van Riel P, van Achterberg T. Fa tigue in patients with rheumatoid 
arthritis: what is known and what is needed. Rheuma tology 2009;48:207–9.  
5. Hewlett S, Cockshott Z, Byron M, et al. Patients ’ perceptions of fatigue in rheumatoid 
arthritis: overwhelming, uncontrollable, ignored. A rthritis Care Res 2005;53:697–702.  
6. Repping-Wuts H, Uitterhoeve R, van Riel P, et al . Fatigue as experienced by patients 
with rheumatoid arthritis (RA): a qualitative study . Int J Nurs Stud 2008;45:995–1002.  
7 Belza Tack B. Fatigue in rheumatoid arthritis. Co nditions, strategies, and consequences. 
Arthritis Care Res 1990;3:65–70.  
8. Gijsbers van Wijk CM, Kolk AM. Sex differences i n physical symptoms: the contribution 
of symptom perception theory. Soc Sci Med 1997;45:2 31–46.  
9. Power JD, Badley EM, French MR, et al. Fatigue i n osteoarthritis: a qualitative study. 
BMC Musculoskelet Disord 2008;9:63.  
10. Pope C, Ziebland S, Mays N. Qualitative researc h in health care. Analysing qualitative 
data. BMJ 2000;320:114–16.  
11. Altman DG, ed. Some common problems in medical research. In: Practical Statistics for 
Medical Research. London: Chapman & Hall/CRC, 1991: 396–439.  
12. Alamanos Y, Drosos AA. Epidemiology of adult rh eumatoid arthritis. Autoimmun Rev 
2005;4:130–6.  
13. Cloin M, Hermans B. Onbetaalde arbeid en de com binatie van arbeid en zorg. [Unpaid 
work and the combination of work and care]. In: Por tegijs W, Hermans B, Lalta V, eds. 
Emancipatiemonitor 2006 – Veranderingen in de leefs ituatie en levensloop 
[Emancipationmonitor 2006 – Changes in living situa tion and life course]. Den Haag: 
Sociaal en Cultureel Planbureau, Centraal Bureau vo or de Statistiek, 2006:100–140.  
14. Eurostat. The Life of Women and Men in Europe –  A Statistical Portrait. Luxembourg: 
Offi ce for Offi cial Publications of the European Communities, 2008.  
15. Riley M, Kahn RL, Foner N, eds. Age and Structu ral Lag. New York: Wiley, 1994.  
16. Bode C, de Ridder DTD, Kuijer RG, et al. Effect s of an intervention promoting proactive 
coping competencies in middle and late adulthood. G erontologist 2007;47:42–51.  84 17. Bode C, de Ridder DTD, Bensing JM. Preparing fo r aging: Development, feasibility and 
preliminary results of an educational program for m idlife and older based on proactive 
coping theory. Patient Educ Couns 2006;61:272–278.  
18. Danoff-Burg S, Revenson TA. Benefi t-fi nding a mong patients with rheumatoid 
arthritis: positive effects on interpersonal relati onships. J Behav Med 2005;28:91–103.  
19. Hewlett S, Nicklin J, Treharne GJ. Fatigue in m usculoskeletal conditions. Topical 
Reviews Series 6: No 1. Arthritis Campaign: Autumn 2008. www.arc.org.uk/arthinfo/ 
medpubs/6641/6641.asp (accessed 30 September 2009).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
85 APPENDIX 1 
 
The questionnaire contained questions about age, ge nder, marital status, education, work 
status and disease duration. Furthermore, the parti cipants completed visual analogue 
scales (VAS) for pain and general health, the Healt h Assessment Questionnaire (HAQ), and 
three VAS fatigue scales 1 for severity (“Please place a mark on the line to show your level  
of fatigue over the past 7 days” (anchors: No fatig ue – Totally exhausted)), impact (“Please 
place a mark on the line to show the effect  that fatigue has had on your life over the past 
7 days” (anchors: No effect – A great deal of effec t)), and coping (“Please place a mark on 
the line to show how well you have coped  with fatigue over the past 7 days” (anchors: Not 
at all well - Very well)). As these three VAS have been developed in the UK, they were 
translated into Dutch, according to the recommended  translation procedure for cross-
cultural adaptation. 2 We collected further information during the interv iews, such as 
medication use, co-morbidities and the patients’ da ily activities. 
According to local regulations in the Netherlands ( WMO) the study did not need approval 
of the ethical review board. We used patient inform ed consent to make sure that patients 
decided consciously to participate in this study. M ost patients preferred an interview at 
home, two patients chose to come to the university.   
 
 
1. Nicklin JK, Kirwan JR, Cramp F, Hewlett S. Stand ardizing visual analogue scales to 
measure fatigue in rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Rheum 2007;56,S778. 
2. Guillemin F, Bombardier C, Beaton D. Cross-cultu ral adaptation of health-related quality 
of life measures: literature review and proposed gu idelines. J Clin Epidemiol 
1993;46:1417-1432. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 86 APPENDIX 2 
 
Table A1  Description of the sample RA patients (N=31) 
       N 
Sex          
 Women      23  
 Men       8   
Age * 
32-57 years (younger group)    15  
 58-83 years (older group)     16 
Marital status 
 Single       3  
 Living with partner/married    20 
 Widow/widower      8  
Level of education 
 Low (≤ 12 years of education)    15  
 Moderate (13-14 years of education)   10  
 High (≥ 14 years of education)     6 
Work status 
 Working full-time      4  
 Working part-time      9  
 Housewife       4 
 Disabled/Retired     14 
Roles ** 
 Few roles      17  
 Multiple roles     14 
Co-morbidities 
 Other rheumatic disease/s     4  
 Other disease/s     13 
Medication 
DMARDs (Disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs)   26    
NSAIDs (Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs)   10    
Prednisone        5   
Biologicals        9  
Medication for other diseases     13  
* Two age groups were formed by splitting the group  at the median age. 
** The variable “roles” was constructed based on de mographic data from the interviews and answers to a  
question about the patients’ daily activities. Pati ents were allocated to the group “multiple roles” w hen they 
fulfilled minimal three of the following criteria: responsibility for children living at home, being a  spouse/partner, 
working at least part-time, being responsible for h ousehold/garden. Patients fulfilling fewer criteria  were 
allocated to the group “few roles”. 
 
 
 
  
87 Table A2  Health-related characteristics of the sample RA pa tients 
    Mean (S.D.)           Range 
VAS Pain    4.00 (2.31)        1.00 – 9.00 
VAS General health   4.00 (2.28)            1.00 – 9.00 
VAS Fatigue severity          50.00 (18.15)    14.0 0 – 90.00 
VAS Impact of fatigue          49.00 (23.65)      1 .00 – 90.00 
VAS Coping with fatigue  67.00 (21.72)     16.00 – 99.00 
HAQ-DI    0.83 (0.63)           0.00 - 2.88 
Disease duration   11.00 years (7.95)                          2.00 – 35.00 years 
VAS= Visual Analogue Scale, HAQ-DI=Health Assessmen t Questionnaire Disability Index 
 
 
 
The mean fatigue severity was 50, the mean impact o f fatigue was 49 and the mean 
coping with fatigue score was 67. VAS fatigue score s did not differ significantly between 
men and women or between younger and older patients  (p>0.05).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 88 APPENDIX 3 
 
In Table A3, the inter-individual differences in fa tigue experiences between men and 
women, two age groups, and people with few or multi ple daily roles are summarized.  
 
 
 
Table A3  Gender, age and role patterns in the experience of fatigue 
 Topic   Gender  Age  Roles   
Negative emotions  
     no negative emotions  > ♂  > older  > few roles 
     one or more emotions  > ♀  > younger  > multiple roles 
Consequences  
     no consequences   > ♂  only older  only few roles 
     mobility and activity  > ♀  -  - 
     housekeeping/gardening  > ♀  > younger   > multiple roles 
     social contacts   only ♀  > younger  - 
     helping others   only ♀  -  - 
     work    only ♀  only younger > multiple roles 
     stress    only ♀  > younger  > multiple roles 
Coping/Management  
     varying ability to cope  only ♀  > younger  > multiple roles 
     dosing activities   only ♀  > younger  > multiple roles 
♂ = men, ♀ = women, > = more, - = no difference; a difference  is defined as at least 15% difference between the 
percentages of respondents in every group (men vs. women/older vs. younger/few vs. multiple). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
89  
 
 
Chapter 5 
 
 
 
Four different patterns of fatigue in rheumatoid ar thritis 
patients: results of a Q-sort study 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S. Nikolaus 
C. Bode 
E. Taal 
M.A.F.J. van de Laar 
 
Rheumatology 2010;49:2191-2199. doi:10.1093/rheumat ology/keq210 90 ABSTRACT 
 
Objectives.  Many patients with RA complain about fatigue. Wher eas qualitative studies 
have covered the meaning of fatigue for RA patients , it was still unknown whether 
subgroups of patients could be distinguished. This study aimed to describe different 
perspectives on the experience of fatigue.  
Methods.  Participants were 30 outpatients with established controlled RA of the Medical 
Spectrum Twente, with a mean fatigue severity score  of 4.67 (visual analogue scale 0–10). 
They evaluated 57 statements about fatigue accordin g to Q-methodology. Data were 
analysed with PCQ for Windows (Portland, OR, USA), using centroid factor analysis with 
varimax rotation (i.e. the participants but not the  items of a scale are the variables). Factor 
scores of statements on the different dimensions we re calculated to investigate which 
items are relevant when describing and distinguishi ng fatigue experiences. Demographic 
and clinical patient characteristics were collected  to describe each of the dimensions that 
resulted from centroid factor analysis.  
Results.  After statistical and theoretical considerations, a four-factor structure of the data 
was obtained. Each factor represented a perspective  on the experience of fatigue, shared 
by a certain group of patients. Physical, psycholog ical and social patient characteristics 
seemed to be associated with those experiences. The  factors were labelled as: ‘Little 
impact of fatigue’; ‘Good coping and bad sleep’; ‘S earch for balance’; and ‘High distress’.  
Conclusions.  Results indicated that fatigue experience is a com plex phenomenon. Existing 
questionnaires to measure fatigue do not meet this complexity. Extensive research is 
warranted and new efforts to develop instruments th at take into account all aspects of 
fatigue are indicated.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
91 INTRODUCTION 
 
Fatigue is a common problem for patients with RA. 1,2  Patients mention fatigue as one of 
their most annoying problems. 3,4  Primarily, fatigue is a subjective experience that  can be 
described as ‘extreme and persistent tiredness, wea kness or exhaustion—mental, physical 
or both’. 5 However, an internationally accepted definition of  fatigue in RA does not exist, 6 
and little is known about its aetiology. 7 Nevertheless, the number of studies including 
fatigue as outcome measure has rapidly increased ov er the last 2 years. This is 
problematic as so little is still known about fatig ue. A theoretical model explaining the 
experience of fatigue in RA is still lacking 8 and consensus about an adequate way to 
measure it has hence not yet been reached. First, m ore insight into the complexity of the 
phenomenon fatigue should be obtained.  
In analogy with pain we should assume that fatigue is what a patient says it is, and it is as 
bad as the patient says it is. Consequently, the mo st appropriate starting point is the 
perspective of the patients. 4 To date, four qualitative studies examining patien ts’ 
experience of fatigue in RA have been conducted in the USA, the UK and The 
Netherlands. 9–12  They all showed that RA patients experience fatigu e as a 
multidimensional, annoying symptom with far-reachin g consequences. Our previous 
study 12  revealed inter- and intra-individual differences i n the patients’ experience of 
fatigue in RA: emotions, consequences and managemen t of fatigue differed with age and 
gender. Some of these differences were related to t he number of daily roles that patients 
had to fulfil. Many patients reported that the seve rity, frequency and duration of their 
fatigue varied, with some even reporting they exper ienced different forms of fatigue. It is 
not yet fully understood which factors cause such i nter- and intraindividual differences in 
fatigue in RA patients. Although we know about the experience of fatigue in general, it is 
still not known whether there are certain groups of  RA patients who experience fatigue in 
a similar way, and which patient characteristics ar e related to differences in fatigue 
experiences between such groups.  
Studies on predicting factors of fatigue in RA show  that not only physical but also 
psychological and social aspects can be related to fatigue. Several studies found that 
pain, 1,2,13–15  physical disabilities, 1,2,16,17  impaired general health, 16  longer symptom 
duration, 13  less physical activities, comorbid conditions, 2 lower sleep quality 1,2  and female 
gender 2,13  were predictive of fatigue in RA. Moreover, psycho social factors emerged, 
which are: depressive symptoms; 1,13,14  anxiety; 17  social stress and problematic social 
support; 13  lower self-efficacy; 15,18  a lower perceived sense of control; 19  and in female RA 
patients, negative interpersonal events predicted h igher levels of fatigue. 20  Regarding the 92 relationship between disease activity and fatigue, the literature shows inconsistent 
results. 1,7,13–16,18,21,22   
The purpose of this study was to identify different  perspectives on the experience of 
fatigue in RA. Furthermore, in our aim to investiga te whether several patient 
characteristics are associated with the fatigue exp eriences, we collected a broad range of 
characteristics that covered not only disease-speci fic information but also topics relating 
to the patient’s daily life. So besides disease-spe cific variables (e.g. disease activity, 
disability, pain), we included social (e.g. age, ma rital status, daily roles) and psychological 
variables (e.g. anxiety, depression).  
 
 
 
PATIENTS AND METHOD 
 
Q-methodology  
We used Q-methodology, which is a valuable tool in research on highly subjective topics, 
such as fatigue. Especially in situations when a to pic is not yet well understood, this 
method is recommended. 23  In comparison with the Likert attitude questionnai res, Q-
methodology provides highly detailed information an d identifies groups of people sharing 
similar views on a certain topic. 24  It has already been used to examine the acceptance  of 
chronic pain 25 and to identify characteristics of adolescent canc er patients sharing a 
common experience of fatigue. 26   
In Q-methodology, a by-person factor analysis is ap plied, whereby the participants but not 
the items of a scale are the variables. 27  First, the researchers had to prepare 40–60 
statements that cover all aspects of the topic unde r study. 28  We developed a 
comprehensive pool of statements by collecting item s from multi-item fatigue scales and 
by selecting relevant statements from our interview  material. 12  For this, we used the items 
of the Multidimensional Assessment of Fatigue (MAF)  scale, 29,30  Functional Assessment of 
Chronic Illness Therapy Fatigue (FACIT-F) scale, 31,32  Profile of Mood States (POMS) 33  and 
Short Form 36 (SF-36) vitality subscale. 34  In a systematic review on measurement of 
fatigue in RA, 6 evidence of reasonable validation could be identif ied for these scales, 
although even they did not meet all the criteria fo r validation. Moreover, we used the 
items of the Checklist Individual Strength (CIS) 35,36  and the Bristol RA Fatigue Multi-
Dimensional Questionnaire (BRAF-MDQ), 37  two scales which are undergoing validation in 
RA at the moment. This resulted in 200 items, which  were systematically reduced. In cases 
of overlapping content of items, we chose the formu lation from the interviews or the 
clearest formulation (when two questionnaire items overlapped). We discussed the  
93 remaining items, whereby those were identified that  represented the most relevant 
categories, based on the interview results and rele vant scientific literature. Ultimately, 57 
items were selected that covered 14 categories: neg ative emotions, consequences, 
impact/ meaning, benefit finding, different forms o f fatigue, severity, duration, frequency, 
cognition/ concentration, energy, sleep, descriptio n, social support and coping/ 
management.  
The items were then printed on cards, which had to be sorted by each participant on a 
worksheet with a Q-sort figure, to reflect his/her agreement with the statements 28  during 
the previous 7 days. We used a Q-sort figure (Fig. 1) with 11 piles, ranging from strongly 
disagree (-6) to strongly agree (+6). The piles con sisted of different numbers of squares, 
whereby most of the cards could be sorted in the ne utral regions and the fewest in the 
extremes. To check the feasibility of the selected items, we piloted the Q-sort with two 
patients. Both the patients judged the method as cl ear and the items as comprehensive 
and relevant.  
 
 
Patients  
This study was performed in collaboration with the patient research partners of our 
Arthritis Centre Twente. In March 2009, 30 RA outpa tients of the rheumatology clinic of 
Medical Spectrum Twente participated in the study. When using Q-methodology, the 
adequate number of participants depends on the numb er of statements that have to be 
sorted. 38  Ideally, the number of statements is at least twic e the number of participants. 39  
Since we used 57 statements in this study, 30 parti cipants is the absolute maximum 
number to be able to conduct a methodologically cor rect analysis. Our aim was to include 
a diverse sample of patients, giving an adequate re flection of the usual RA outpatient 
population with all levels of fatigue. Selection cr iterion was a diagnosis of RA at least 2 
years previously to make sure that the patients had  sufficient experience with RA to be 
able to sort the statements on fatigue. According t o local regulations in The Netherlands 
(WMO), the study did not need approval of the ethic al review board; only (non-
intervention) studies with a high burden for patien ts have to be reviewed. Patients 
underwent no intervention or treatment and the burd en of participation was relatively 
low. Before starting the Q-sort, patients signed an  informed consent, to make sure that 
they decided consciously to participate in this stu dy, and completed a questionnaire. 
 
 
 
 94 Figure 1 Q-sort worksheet 
 
    During the past 7 days…    
strongly disagree       strongly agree 
     
-6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 
             
           
         
       
     
     
   
    
 
 
 
 
        
 
 
 
 
Method  
For conducting the Q-sort, the researcher (S.N.) ma de individual appointments with the 
patients. Most of them chose to complete the Q-sort  at home, and two at the university. 
They were asked to read the statements about fatigu e and to make three initial global 
piles (agreed with; did not agree with; and neutral /doubtful). Then patients sorted the 
cards on the worksheet, starting with the statement  they agreed with least, until all 
statements they disagreed with were on the workshee t. Then they did the same with 
statements they did agree with. Next, patients sort ed the remaining statements in the 
middle of the worksheet. After finishing the task, they read the items again, so they could 
rearrange the cards if necessary. Finally, the rese archer (S.N.) noted the numbers of the 
statements (which were written on the back of the c ards) on a record sheet with the Q-
sort figure.  
For analysis the Q-sorts were correlated, whereby a  high correlation indicated that 
participants sorted the cards in a similar way. By- person factor analysis was used to 
analyse the Q-sort correlation matrix, obtaining fa ctors that represented groups of 
participants with a similar opinion. 28  Factor scores were calculated for each statement,  
95 which resulted in one representative Q-sort per gro up. The diversity of participants was 
more important than the sample size, which was larg e enough when factor stability and a 
clear understanding of the factors’ meaning were en sured. 38  For an appropriate analysis, 
considerably more statements were needed than parti cipants (ideally, the number of 
items should be at least twice the number of partic ipants). 39   
 
 
Measurements  
Patient characteristics  
Patients answered questions about marital status, c hildren living at home, work situation, 
important life events, exercise, medication and rec ent medication change, comorbidity, 
health status, hours of sleep during the night and napping during daytime.  
Daily roles  
With eight items, patients were asked to indicate h ow many hours per week they normally 
spent on the following eight areas: work; study; ho usekeeping (cooking, shopping, 
washing, cleaning); caring for people at home (e.g.  children, ill spouse, parents); caring for 
people outside home; voluntary work; gardening and pets. They could choose one of the 
following six answers: not applicable to me (scored  as 0); on average >0 and <3 h/week; 
>3 and <10 h; >10 and <20 h; >20 and <30 h; and >30  h (scored as 5). By adding up all the 
scores, we calculated a personal role score (range:  0–40).  
Visual analogue scales  
Patients completed a visual analogue scale (VAS) fo r pain and impact of the disease, and 
three VAS fatigue scales 40  for severity (‘Please place a mark on the line to show your level 
of fatigue over the past 7 days’ (anchors: no fatig ue - totally exhausted); impact (‘Please 
place a mark on the line to show the effect that fa tigue has had on your life over the past 
7 days’ (anchors: no effect—a great deal of effect) ; and coping (‘Please place a mark on 
the line to show how well you have coped with fatig ue over the past 7 days’ (anchors: not 
at all well—very well). As these three VASs were de veloped in the UK, they were 
translated into Dutch according to the recommended translation procedure for cross-
cultural adaptation. 41   
Anxiety, depression and disability  
The Dutch versions of the anxiety subscale of the H ospital Anxiety and Depression Scale 
(HADS), 42  the 15-item Geriatric Depression Scale (GDS) 43  and the 10-item version of the 
HAQ-II 44  were completed.  
Laboratory values  
The 28-joint DAS, CRP, ESR and haemoglobin (Hb) val ues were collected.  
 96 Analysis  
The Q-sort data were analysed with PCQ for Windows,45  using centroid factor analysis 
with varimax rotation. The decision for four factor s with a significance level of 0.40 was 
based on the following considerations: a maximum nu mber of Q-sorts loading significantly 
on one factor; all factors having an eigenvalue >1;  a maximal explained variance; no 
factors with only one significantly loading Q-sort;  and as few as possible consensus items 
and no bipolar factors. For the theoretical interpr etation of the factors, we used those 
statements with extreme factor loadings (+4, +5, +6  and -4, -5, -6). First, we looked at the 
four patterns of fatigue experience based on the co ntent of these statements. Then, we 
also looked at which patient variables (see the app endix at the end of this article) 
characterized the four groups. To this end, we used  percentages and median values with 
inter-quartile ranges. We described the most promin ent patient characteristics in each 
group, without testing for statistically significan t differences. Owing to the small sample 
size in the groups, the power would be too small in  such an analysis. However, describing 
patient characteristics in each group gave interest ing indications about which kind of 
fatigue experience is perceived by which patients. All four authors were involved in the 
decision process about the number and naming of the  factors, whereby professional 
knowledge from psychology and clinical rheumatology  was incorporated.  
 
 
RESULTS  
 
Sample  
The sample consisted of 13 men and 17 women with a mean age of 60 years (S.D. 12.15 
years), ranging from 38 to 82. The mean score of da ily roles was 6.8 (S.D. 3), ranging from 
1 to 12. Further sample characteristics and health- related outcomes are shown in the 
appendix. The mean disease duration was 9.9 years ( S.D. 6 years; range: 2–26 years). The 
range of VAS fatigue scores for severity (range 1–9 ), impact (range 1–9) and coping (range 
2–10) showed that patients with all levels of fatig ue were included. The Cronbach’s α 
values of the scales to measure anxiety, depression  and disability were 0.76 (HADS), 0.60 
(GDS) and 0.85 (HAQ-II).  
 
Patterns of fatigue experience  
Factor analysis showed that the optimal solution fo r this Q-sort data was a four-factor 
structure. Thereby, two-thirds of the Q-sorts loade d significantly on one factor. Of the 
remaining 10 Q-sorts, 8 did not load significant on  any factor and 2 were confounders  
97 (significant factor loadings on 2 factors). The exp lained variance was 40%. The four-factor 
solution was also the best alternative for theoreti cal interpretation.  
 
The factor groups are described as follows: those i tems with extreme factor loadings (+4, 
+5, +6 and -4, -5, -6) were used for the descriptio n of the fatigue experience. Furthermore, 
per group, the most distinctive patient characteris tics are described briefly. These results 
are summarized in Table 1. Extensive tables are pro vided in the appendix: table A1 
quantitatively summarizes the patient characteristi cs per factor; table A2 shows the factor 
scores per statement and eigenvalues, percentage ex plained variance and median factor 
scores per factor; and table A3 shows the most char acterizing statements per group 
(statements with the strongest agreement and also t he strongest disagreement).  
 
Group A: little impact of fatigue (n = 7)  
Group A consisted of seven patients having Q-sorts with negative factor loadings, so the 
Q-sorts had to be interpreted in the reverse way. 46  It means that, for example, the 
patients strongly agreed with the statement in colu mn 6. For better readability, the 
interpretative correct algebraic signs were used in  tables A2 and A3 (see appendix). Group 
A patients reported days without any fatigue, only being tired after doing too much and 
that the fatigue would pass if they rested. Further more, they agreed with having a lot of 
energy and having good coping competencies. However , the ability to cope well with 
fatigue varied. These patients belonged to the olde st group, with the fewest daily roles 
(see table A1of the appendix). Group A had moderate  disease activity in absolute terms, 
which reflects the highest disease activity of all four groups. They scored low on pain, 
fatigue severity and fatigue effect, and had high f atigue coping scores. More than half of 
the Group A patients reported to seldom rest during  the day. Compared with Groups B 
and C, Group A had average disease duration and rep orted less exercising. They had 
higher disability scores than Group C, but the same  as Group B. In this group, no 
biologicals were used.  
 
Group B: Good coping and bad sleep (n = 5)  
Group B patients reported disrupted and non-refresh ing sleep. They also had days without 
any fatigue and could cope with it well. They did n ot let on to anyone when they were 
tired and felt physically impeded by their fatigue.  Group B consisted of more women than 
men (see table A1 of the appendix). Compared with t he other groups, Group B patients 
had an average number of daily roles and reported t he least number of hours they usually 
slept during the night. Four of the five patients r eported not resting during the day on a 
regular basis. None of them had fatigue-related com orbidities. They had the longest 98 disease duration, the lowest fatigue severity and i mpact scores of all four groups, and also 
their pain score was low. Four of the five patients  in Group B reported exercising on a 
weekly basis. Moreover, Group B patients rated thei r general health as better and the 
impact of their disease on their life as lower than  patients in the other groups. Three of 
the five patients used a biological. 
 
Group C: search for balance (n = 6)  
Group C consisted of six patients. They were not re freshed in the morning, took a nap 
during the day, lived in a constant struggle to fin d a balance between activity and rest and 
just carried on when they were fatigued. Moreover, they reported only being tired after 
doing too much and could cope well with their fatig ue. Group C was the youngest group 
(see table A1 of the appendix). All patients were l iving with a partner, most of them had 
paid work and half of them had children living at h ome. The role score was the highest of 
all groups. In addition, most of the patients exerc ised on a weekly basis. This group scored 
higher on pain, fatigue severity and impact, lower on the ability to cope with fatigue and 
had shorter disease duration than Groups A and B. D isability scores were lower than those 
in the other groups. In this group, as many biologi cals are used as in Group B and also 
DMARDs were frequently reported.  
 
Group D: high distress (n = 2)  
Group D was the smallest group with two patients. T hey found it difficult to accept the 
fatigue, were frustrated when they were too fatigue d to do things they wanted to do, had 
difficulty concentrating when they were fatigued, w ere often awake during the night and 
had to plan everything they did because of their fa tigue. Group D patients reported the 
highest levels of pain and fatigue (severity and ef fect), most comorbidities, high levels of 
anxiety and depression and the shortest disease dur ation (see table A1 of the appendix). 
Group D patients had the highest disability scores,  did no regular exercise and their 
general health was worse. Of all the groups, they r eported the most hours’ sleep during 
the night, and regularly taking a nap during the da y. They had slightly lower coping fatigue 
scores on the VAS than patients in the other groups .  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
99 TABLE 1  Summary of fatigue experience and the most striking patient characteristics per group  
Group   Fatigue experience    Patient characteristic s  
Group A   Days without any fatigue   Oldest group               
n=7  Only fatigued if too much undertaken  Fewest n umber of daily roles   
  Good coping competencies   Moderate but highest d isease activity   
  Fatigue would pass if they rested   Low pain scor es on VAS   
  A lot of energy    Low fatigue severity and impac t on VAS 
  Varying ability to cope with fatigue  High fatigu e coping scores on VAS  
      Most of them seldom rest during the day 
      Average disease duration   
      Less exercising than Groups B and C  
      Higher disability scores than Group C and     
       comparable to Group B  
      No biologicals are used    
Group B   Good coping with fatigue   More women tha n men        
n=5  Days without any fatigue   Average number of d aily roles   
  Not showing fatigue to anyone   Least hours of sl eep during the night  
  Often awake during the night   Most of them do no t rest during the day 
  Unrefreshing sleep   No comorbidities    
  Fatigue impedes physical activity   Longest disea se duration   
      Lowest fatigue severity and impact (VAS)    
      Low pain scores   
      Most of them regularly exercise   
      Most positive general health   
      Lowest impact of the disease on daily life 
      Three patients used a biological 
Group C   Trying to control fatigue by seeking  You ngest group        
n=6    balance  between activity and rest  All livi ng with partner    
  Taking a nap during the day   Most of them in pai d work   
  Unrefreshing sleep    Half of them with children at home  
  Only fatigued if too much undertaken  Highest rol e score    
  Just carrying on when fatigued   Most of them reg ularly exercise   
  Good coping with fatigue   Higher pain scores on VAS than A and B   
      Higher fatigue severity and impact on VAS  
        than Groups A and B   
      Lower fatigue coping scores on VAS than 
        Groups A and B   
      Shorter disease duration than A and B  
      Lowest disability scores   
      As many biologicals as in Group B   
      Frequent use of DMARDs    
Group D   Difficulty in thinking clearly when   Hig hest pain scores on VAS                   
n=2     fatigued     Highest fatigue severity and i mpact on VAS 
  Often awake during the night   Most with comorbid ities   
  Difficult to accept fatigue  High on anxiety and d epression  
  Frustration when too fatigued to do sth Shortest disease duration   
  Need to plan everything   Highest disability scor es  
  Difficulty in concentrating when    No regular exe rcise    
    fatigued    Worst general health    
      Most hours of sleep during the night  
      Regular nap during the day   
      Slightly lower fatigue coping on VAS   
The fatigue experiences in this table are based on t he statements with extreme factor loadings  
(+4, +5, +6 and -4, -5, -6).  100 DISCUSSION  
 
In this study, we identified four different perspec tives on the experience of fatigue in RA. 
Although parts of the fatigue experiences overlappe d in the groups, there were 
remarkable differences, also regarding the patients ’ living situation and other 
characteristics.  
For Group A patients, fatigue had almost no impact on their lives. Their fatigue was 
comparable to normal fatigue. The higher age in Gro up A did not seem to be associated 
with longer disease duration. So the low impact of fatigue cannot be explained by a longer 
time of experience of coping with RA. It is more li kely that the higher age in this group was 
related to the few daily roles that patients had to  fulfil. After retirement, people have 
fewer roles, 47  and expectations from others are less demanding. I n addition, older 
people’s psychological resources to adapt to fatigu e might be higher because they have 
learned to adjust to changing life circumstances an d accommodate their goals and 
standards with greater flexibility than younger peo ple. 48  Group B patients reported 
disrupted and non-refreshing sleep, and being physi cally impeded by their fatigue. 
However, four of the five patients said they exerci sed on a weekly basis and, in general, 
fatigue had little impact on their lives. Some expl anations for their good coping ability 
could be the fact that the patients had the longest  disease duration and the least fatigue 
severity of all groups, and that they had an averag e but not high number of daily roles. 
Group C patients experienced more impact of fatigue  than Group A and B patients. They 
knew how to deal with their fatigue, but in line wi th the high amount of activity in Group 
C, they lived in a constant struggle to find a bala nce between activity and rest. That this 
effort was not always successful is reflected by th eir agreement to just carry on when they 
were fatigued (Item 54). This struggle might be rel ated to the fact that Group C was the 
youngest group with the most daily roles. Those pat ients with multiple roles (e.g. 
housekeeping, working, being a spouse, parent), see med to live in a constant tension 
between adequate fulfilment of their roles and the need for rest or relaxing activities. This 
finding is in line with the results of our intervie w study that the impact of fatigue was 
worst in young women with multiple roles. 12  Patients in Group D were very distressed and 
fatigue had a great impact on their lives. Compared  with the other groups, they had the 
most physical and mental health problems. The high levels of physical and psychological 
distress in this group probably made it difficult f or patients to accept their fatigue and 
cope with it in a constructive way. 
This study is descriptive and cannot examine causal  relationships. Our aim was not to find 
such relationships or statistically significant dif ferences between groups. Rather, we made 
a first attempt to describe dominant perspectives o n fatigue experience in RA and to  
101 describe the patient groups which share a certain p erspective. However, it is an 
outstanding finding that Group A patients had the h ighest but still moderate disease 
activity, although they experienced the least impac t of fatigue. We assume that this points 
to the importance of psychological and social aspec ts, beside physical ones, in the 
experience of fatigue in RA. It seems likely that t he fatigue experience in patients with 
established controlled RA is not so much influenced  by disease-specific characteristics as 
by personal and situational characteristics. The di fferences in fatigue experience appeared 
to be related to tasks, external demands and coping  resources. The complexity of the 
fatigue experience in RA is further underlined by t he fact that one-third of the patients 
could not be allocated to one of the groups. Furthe rmore, there was no item with which 
all patients strongly agreed (sorted between +4 and  +6 in all groups) or disagreed (sorted 
between -4 and -6 in all groups). This shows that m easurement instruments should 
include items that reflect a broad spectrum of fati gue experiences in order to be able to 
adequately describe fatigue experiences in RA patie nts and to distinguish between 
patients with different patterns of fatigue experie nce. 
When looking at the existing multi-item fatigue sca les, MAF, FACIT-F, POMS, SF-36 vitality 
subscale, CIS and the BRAF-MDQ, it becomes obvious that none of them covers all 
categories. A comparable conclusion has already bee n drawn by Nicklin et al. ,49  who 
showed that neither the MAF, SF-36 vitality subscal e, POMS or FACIT-F covers all of the 
following patient-reported categories of fatigue: f requency/severity, duration, energy, 
impact, emotion, coping, social life, planning, rel ationships, cognition, quality of life and 
sleep. All of these categories also turned out to b e relevant in this study; the categories 
social life, planning, relationships and quality of  life were included in the ‘consequences’ 
category in our study. The CIS consisting of the di mensions ‘subjective feeling of fatigue’, 
‘concentration’, ‘motivation’ and ‘physical activit y’ does not cover all dimensions either. 
The BRAF-MDQ was recently developed and validated i n a British population and is based 
on interviews with patients scoring seven or higher  on a fatigue severity VAS. So we 
assume that there is still no measurement instrumen t available which embraces the full 
diversity of the subjective experience of fatigue w ith its several dimensions and possible 
ranges of fatigue severity. To be able to measure f atigue in RA with all its facets, new ways 
of measurement are needed in the future. Not only s hould more aspects of fatigue then 
be included but also new developments in measuremen t applications should be used. 
Computer-adaptive testing seems to be a promising m ethod to comprehensively measure 
fatigue with relatively few items per patient. 50   
New measurement instruments should also be used for  screening purposes. In clinical 
practice, a patient’s perspective on fatigue experi ence should be identified. Consequently, 
it would be possible to provide tailored support. P atients with a fatigue experience such as 102 patients in Group D might benefit from a psycho-soc ial intervention that is focused on the 
high level of distress, whereas patients with an ex perience similar to patients in Group C 
might be aided by an approach emphasizing the balan cing of roles and demands. Patients 
with a fatigue experience such as patients in Group  B could probably benefit from support 
focused on sleep. However, for patients with an exp erience similar to patients in Group A, 
support seems unnecessary.  
Our sample of 30 RA outpatients was sufficient for using Q-methodology. 28,38,39  Since this 
research raises new hypotheses, generalizations to the entire population of RA patients 
should be made with caution and need more research.  However, evidence for the test–
retest reliability and also the reliability across subjects in Q-sort results could be identified 
in research concerning different topics. 24  All patients in our study had a disease duration 
of at least 2 years. We acknowledge that we missed patients with recently developed RA 
and patients in flare. As those patients mostly hav e anaemia, high disease activity with 
fever and very high levels of fatigue, it is import ant to include them in future research on 
fatigue experiences. Moreover, DASs were relatively  low in this sample, which raises the 
question of to what extent our results can be gener alized to patients with high disease 
activity. However, nowadays, high disease activity is not very common among RA 
outpatients. In a recent study about the patients’ perspective on fatigue in RA, relatively 
low disease activity was reported in a comparable s ample also. 11   
This study revealed different types of fatigue expe rience, reflecting the patients’ 
perspective and showing the match with patient char acteristics. Results indicated that 
fatigue experience is a complex phenomenon related to physical, psychological and social 
resources and competencies.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
103 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  
 
We would like to thank the patients who participate d in this study and also Alisa van 
Zonneveld for assistance with data collection.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 104 REFERENCES 
  
1. Wolfe F, Hawley DJ, Wilson K. The prevalence and  meaning of fatigue in rheumatic 
disease. J Rheumatol 1996;23:1407–17.  
2.Belza BL, Henke CJ, Yelin EH, Epstein WV, Gilliss  CL. Correlates of fatigue in older adults 
with rheumatoid arthritis. Nurs Res 1993;42:93–9.  
3. Hewlett S, Carr M, Ryan S et al. Outcomes genera ted by patients with rheumatoid 
arthritis: how important are they? Musculoskel Care  2005;3:131–42.  
4. Kirwan JR, Newman S, Tugwell PS, Wells GA. Patie nt perspective on outcomes in 
rheumatology—a position paper for OMERACT 9. J Rheu matol 2009;36:2067–70.  
5. Dittner AJ, Wessely SC, Brown RG. The assessment  of fatigue. A practical guide for 
clinicians and researchers. J Psychosom Res 2004;56 :157–70.  
6. Hewlett S, Hehir M, Kirwan JR. Measuring fatigue  in rheumatoid arthritis: a systematic 
review of scales in use. Arthritis Rheum 2007;57:42 9–39.  
7. Swain MG. Fatigue in chronic disease. Clin Sci 2 000;99: 1–8.  
8. Hewlett S, Nicklin J, Treharne GJ. Fatigue in mu sculoskeletal conditions. Topical Reviews 
Series 6: No 1. Arthritis Campaign: Autumn 2008 www .arc.org.uk/arthinfo/medpubs/6641 
/6641.asp (1 December 2009, date last accessed).  
9. Belza Tack B. Fatigue in rheumatoid arthritis: c onditions, strategies, and consequences. 
Arthritis Care Res 1990;3: 65–70.  
10. Hewlett S, Cockshott Z, Byron M et al. Patients ’ perceptions of fatigue in rheumatoid 
arthritis: overwhelming, uncontrollable, ignored. A rthritis Care Res 2005;53:697–702.  
11. Repping-Wuts H, Uitterhoeve R, van Riel P, van Achterberg T. Fatigue as experienced 
by patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA): a quali tative study. Int J Nurs Stud 
2008;45:995–1002.  
12. Nikolaus S, Bode C, Taal E, van de Laar MAFJ. N ew insights into the experience of 
fatigue among patients with rheumatoid arthritis: a  qualitative study. Ann Rheum Dis 
2010;69:895–7.  
13. Huyser BA, Parker JC, Thoreson R, Smarr KL, Joh nson JC, Hoffman R. Predictors of 
subjective fatigue among individuals with rheumatoi d arthritis. Arthritis Rheum 
1998;41:2230–7.  
14. Pollard LC, Choy EH, Gonzalez J, Khoshaba B, Sc ott DL. Fatigue in rheumatoid arthritis 
reflects pain, not disease activity. Rheumatology 2 006;45:885–9.  
15. Riemsma RP, Rasker JJ, Taal E, Griep EN, Wouter  JMGW, Wiegman O. Fatigue in 
rheumatoid arthritis: the role of self-efficacy and  problematic social support. Br J 
Rheumatol 1998;37:1042–6.   
105 16. Repping-Wuts H, Fransen J, van Achterberg T, Bl eijenberg G, van Riel P. Persistent 
severe fatigue in patients with rheumatoid arthriti s. J Clinical Nurs 2007;16: 377–83.  
17. Mancuso CA, Rincon M, Sayles W, Paget SA. Psych osocial variables and fatigue: a 
longitudinal study comparing individuals with rheum atoid arthritis and healthy controls. J 
Rheumatol 2006;33:1496–502.  
18. Treharne GJ, Lyons AC, Hale ED, Goodchild CE, B ooth DA, Kitas GD. Predictors of 
fatigue over 1 year among people with rheumatoid ar thritis. Psychol Health Med 
2008;13:494–504.  
19. Younger J, Finan P, Zautra A, Davis M, Reich J.  Personal mastery predicts pain, stress, 
fatigue, and blood pressure in adults with rheumato id arthritis. Psychol Health 2008; 
23:515–35.  
20. Parrish BP, Zautra A, Davis MC. The role of pos itive and negative interpersonal events 
on daily fatigue in women with fibromyalgia, rheuma toid arthritis, and osteoarthritis. 
Health Psychol 2008;27:694–702.  
21. Davis MC, Zautra AJ, Younger J, Motivala SJ, At trep J, Irwin MR. Chronic stress and 
regulation of cellular markers of inflammation in r heumatoid arthritis: implications for 
fatigue. Brain Behav Immun 2008;22:24–32.  
22. Repping-Wuts H, van Riel P, van Achterberg T. F atigue in patients with rheumatoid 
arthritis: what is known and what is needed. Rheuma tology 2009;48:207–9.  
23. Redburn FS. Q factor analysis: application to e ducational testing and program 
evaluation. Educ Psychol Meas 1975; 35:767–78.  
24. Ten Klooster PM, Visser M, de Jong MDT. Compari ng two image research instruments: 
the Q-sort method versus the Likert Attitude Questi onnaire. Food Qual Prefer 2008;19: 
511–8.  
25. Risdon A, Eccleston C, Crombez G, McCracken L. How can we learn to live with pain? A 
Q-methodological analysis of the diverse understand ings of acceptance of chronic pain. 
Soc Sci Med 2003;56:375–86.  
26. Lai JS, Kupst MJ, Cella D, Brown SR, Peterman A , Goldman S. Using Q-methodology to 
understand perceived fatigue reported by adolescent s with cancer. Psychooncology 
2007;16:437–47.  
27. Barbosa JC, Willoughby P, Rosenberg CA, Mrtek R G. Statistical methodology: VII. Q-
methodology, a structural analytic approach to medi cal subjectivity. Acad Emerg Med 
1998;5:1032–40.  
28. Brown SR. Q technique and method: principles an d procedures. In: Berry WD, Lewis-
Beck MS, eds. New tools for social scientists: adva nces and applications in research 
methods. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage, 1986:57–76.  106 29. Belza Tack B. Dimensions and correlates of fati gue in older adults with rheumatoid 
arthritis [dissertation]. San Francisco: University  of California, 1991.  
30. Belza B. Comparison of self-reported fatigue in  rheumatoid arthritis and controls. J 
Rheumatol 1995;22:639–43.  
31. Cella D, Webster K. Linking outcomes management  to quality-of-life measurement. 
Oncology 1997;11:232–5.  
32. Yellen SB, Cella DF, Webster K, Blendowski C, K aplan E. Measuring fatigue and other 
anemia-related symptoms with the Functional Assessm ent of Cancer Therapy (FACT) 
measurement system. J Pain Symptom Manage 1997;13: 63–74.  
33. McNair D, Lorr M, Droppelman L. Profile of Mood  States Manual. New York: Multi-
health Systems Inc., 1992.  
34. Ware JE Jr, Sherbourne CD. The MOS 36-Item Shor t-Form Health Survey (SF-36). I. 
Conceptual framework and item selection. Med Care 1 992;30:473–83.  
35. Vercoulen JHHM, Swanink CMA, Fennis JFM, Galama  JMD, van der Meer JWM, 
Bleijenberg G. Dimensional assessment of chronic fa tigue syndrome. J Psychosom Res 
1994;38:383–92.  
36. Van Hoogmoed D, Fransen J, Bleijenberg G, van R iel PLCM. How to assess fatigue in 
rheumatoid arthritis: validity and reliability of t he checklist individual strength. Arthritis 
Rheum 2008;58:868.  
37. Nicklin JK, Kirwan J, Cramp F, Urban M, Hewlett  S. Development and initial validation 
of the Bristol RA Multi-Dimensional Questionnaire ( BRAF-MDQ). Rheumatology 
2009;48:12.  
38. McKeown BF, Thomas DB. Q-methodology. Newbury P ark, CA: Sage Publications, 1988.  
39. Thompson B. Q-technique factor analysis: one va riation on the two-mode factor 
analysis of variables. In: Grimm LG, Yarnold PR, ed s. Reading and understanding more 
multivariate statistics. Washington DC: American Ps ychological Association, 2002:207–26.  
40. Nicklin JK, Kirwan JR, Cramp F, Hewlett S. Stan dardizing visual analogue scales to 
measure fatigue in rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Rheum 2007;56:S778.  
41. Guillemin F, Bombardier C, Beaton D. Cross-cult ural adaptation of health-related 
quality of life measures: literature review and pro posed guidelines. J Clin Epidemiol 
1993;46:1417–32.  
42. Zigmond AS, Snaith RP. The Hospital Anxiety and  Depression Scale. Acta Psychiatr 
Scand 1983;67:361–70.  
43. Sheikh JI, Yesavage JA, Brooks JO, Friedman L, Gratzinger P. Proposed factor structure 
of the Geriatric Depression Scale. Int Psychogeriat r 1991;3:23–8. 
 44. Wolfe F, Michaud K, Pincus T. Development and validation of the Health Assessment 
Questionnaire II. Arthritis Rheum 2004;50:3296–305.    
107 45. Stricklin M, Almeida R. PCQ for Windows (Academ ic Edition 1.4, 2004). 
http://pcqsoft.com/ (1 December 2009, date last acc essed).  
46. Ramlo SE, McConnell D, Duan Z-H, Moore FB. Eval uating an inquiry-based 
bioinformatics course using Q methodology. J Sci Ed uc Technol 2008;17:219–25. 
 47. Riley M, Kahn RL, Foner N, eds., Age and struc tural lag. New York: Wiley, 1994.  
48. Brandtstädter J, Rothermund K. The life-course dynamics of goal pursuit and goal 
adjustment: a two-process framework. Dev Rev 2002;2 2: 117–50.  
49. Nicklin JK, Kirwan J, Cramp F, Hewlett S. Do ex isting scales capture the multi-
dimensional aspects of RA fatigue? Presentation ACR /ARHP Scientific Meeting, San 
Francisco, CA, October 2008.  
50. Rose M, Bezjak A. Logistics of collecting patie ntreported outcomes (PROs) in clinical 
practice: an overview and practical examples. Qual Life Res 2009;18: 125–36.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 108 APPENDIX 
 
Table A1 Summary table patient characteristics 
 
 
Characteristics     Group A             Group B               Group C          Group D             Oth er          Total group    
       (N=7)             (N=5)   (N=6)          (N= 2)                   (N=10) (N=30) 
Gender 
Women, n (%)      4 (57%)             4 (80%)  3 (5 0%)         1 (50%)                5 (50%) 17 (57%)  
Men, n (%)                          3 (43%)             1 (20%)  3 (50%)         1 (50%)                5 (50%) 13 (43%) 
Age 
Median        78.00              54.00  54.50          58.50                   58.00  59.50 
Inter quartile   
range (IQR)                    66.00-79.00      46. 00-64.50         40.25-60.00      45.00-72.00     5 6.00-64.25      53.75-69.00 
Marital status 
Married, n (%)     3 (43%)             5 (100%) 6 ( 100%)         1 (50%)                7 (70%)         22 (73%) 
Widowed, n (%)     4 (57%)             0 (0%) 0 (0% )         0 (0%)                  1 (10%)  5 (17%) 
Single, n (%)     0 (0%)              0 (0%) 0 (0%)          1 (50%)                2 (20%)  3 (10%) 
Children at home  
Yes, n (%)      0 (0%)             2 (40%) 3 (50%)         1 (50%)                2 (20%)           8 (27%) 
No, n (%)      7 (100%)             3 (60%) 3 (50%)          1 (50%)                8 (80%)         22 (73%) 
Paid work   
Yes, n (%)                         1 (14%)             2 (40%)              5 (83%)        1 (50%)                3 (30%) 12 (40%) 
No, n (%)                         6 (86%)             3 (60%) 1 (17%)        1 (50%)                7 (70%)           18 (60%) 
Weekly exercise 
Yes, n (%)                        3 (43%)            4 (80%) 5 (83%)         0 (0%)               10 ( 100%)       22 (73%) 
No, n (%)                        4 (57%)            1 (20%) 1 (17%)         2 (100%)             0 (0% ) 8 (27%) 
Medication 
DMARDs, n (%)                7 (100%)            3 (50%) 6 (100%)         1 (50%)               8 (80% )         25 (83%) 
NSAIDs, n (%)    0 (0%)            1 (20%) 2 (33%)         0 (0%)                  4 (40%)          7 (23%) 
Prednisolon, n (%)           3 (43%)            0 ( 0%) 0 (0%)         0 (0%)                  1 (10%)          4 (13%) 
Biologicals, n (%)              0 (0%)            3  (60%) 3 (50%)         1 (50%)                 2 (2 0%) 9 (30%) 
Co-morbidity 
(fatigue-related) 
Yes, n (%)     1 (14%)            0 (0%)  1 (17%)         2 (100%)              3 (30%) 7 (23%) 
No, n (%)     6 (86%)            5 (100%)  5 (83%)         0 (0%)                   7 (70%)       23 ( 77%) 
Health status 
Very good, n (%)   0 (0%)            2 (40%)  0 (0% )         0 (0%)                   0 (0%)  2 (7%) 
Good, n (%)   5 (71%)            3 (60%)  4 (67%)        1 (50%)                 8 (80%)        21 (70 %) 
Good– 
moderate, n (%)   0 (0%)             0 (0%)  1 (17% )         0 (0%)                   0 (0%) 1 (3%) 
Moderate, n (%)   2 (29%)            0 (0%)  1 (17% )         0 (0%)                  2 (20%) 5 (17%) 
Bad, n (%)                        0 (0%)            0 (0%)  0 (0%)        1 (50%)                 0 (0 %) 1 (3%) 
 
  
109  
Characteristics     Group A             Group B               Group C          Group D             Oth er          Total group    
       (N=7)             (N=5)   (N=6)          (N= 2)                   (N=10) (N=30) 
Hours sleep 
Less 6, n (%)      0 (0%)             1 (20%)   0 ( 0%)          0 (0%)                   1 (10%)  2 (7 %) 
6-7, n (%)                          1 (14%)             3 (60%)   1 (17%)          0 (0%)                   4 (40%)  9 (30%) 
7-8, n (%)                          4 (57%)              0 (0%)   3 (50%)         1 (50%)                 5 (50%)        13 (43%) 
More 8, n (%)      2 (29%)             1 (20%)   2 (33%)         1 (50%) 0 (0%)          6 (20%) 
Regular nap during day 
Yes, n (%)       2 (29%)             1 (20%)   5 (8 3%)          2 (100%)               6 (60%) 16 (53% ) 
No, n (%)                          5 (71%)             4 (80%)   1 (17%)           0 (0%) 4 (40%)  14 (47%) 
Disease duration  
Median        10.00              15.00      5.50            5.00  10.00    10.00   
IQR  5.25-11.75           9.00-17.5 3.75-12.25        3.00-7.00             5.25-17.00     5.00-14.00 
Role-score 
Median         3.00                7.00      10.00           6.00  6.50                 7.00 
IQR    2.00-6.00           5.50-7.00 8.50-12.00       2.00-10.00            5.75-8.25       5.00-9.00 
Pain 
Median        2.00                2.00       3.00           6.00  5.00                3.00 
IQR   1.00-4.00           2.00-3.00 2.75-4.75       3.00-9.00              2.75-6.00        2.00-5.00 
Impact of disease  
Median       3.00               2.00      4.00           6.50                     3.50                3.00 
IQR   2.00-5.00           2.00-2.50  3.00-6.25       5.00-8.00             2.75-5.00        2.00-5.00 
Fatigue severity  
Median      3.00              3.00      4.50           7.00                    6.50                 5. 00 
IQR   2.00-5.00          2.00-3.50  2.75-7.00       5.00-9.00             5.00-7.20        3.00-7.00 
Impact of fatigue  
Median      3.00              2.00      3.50           7.00                   5.50                  3. 00 
IQR   2.00-5.00          1.50-2.50   2.00-6.25        5.00-9.00           3.00-7.25         2.00-6.00 
Coping with fatigue  
Median       8.00              8.00      6.50            6.00                  7.00    7.00 
IQR   6.00-8.00          4.50-8.50   3.50-7.75        5.00-7.00           5.75-8.00        6.00-8.00 
HADS anxiety 
Median      3.00              4.00      3.00           12.00                   5.00                 4. 00 
IQR   1.00-6.00         2.50-8.00 2.50-3.25     11. 00-13.00         3.75-5.00        3.00-5.00 
GDS depression 
Median     2.00             1.00      1.00            6.00                  2.00   2.00 
IQR   2.00-2.00         0.50-4.00  0.00-2.50         6.00-6.00         1.50-4.75        1.00-4.00 
HAQ-II disability 
Median     0.90            0.90      0.70           1.10                  0.90                  0.85 
IQR   0.20-1.30         0.50-1.20 0.38-0.90        0.70-1.50           0.73-1.00        0.58-1.13 
DAS 28   
Median     3.33             1.96      2.40            2.52                  2.91    2.51 
IQR  2.08-4.90         1.20-3.00               1.98 -2.91           1.23-3.81           2.11-3.54        2.05-3.39 
 110  
Characteristics     Group A             Group B               Group C          Group D             Oth er          Total group    
       (N=7)             (N=5)   (N=6)          (N= 2)                   (N=10) (N=30) 
Hb value 
Median                           7.70              9.30   8.50           9.20  8.30               8.30  
IQR    6.43-8.08           8.15-9.6 8.08-9.25       9.00-9.40             8.05-8.65       8.00-9.10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
111 Table A2  Item scores (varimax) 
 
Items During the past 7 days…                                                                                         Groups  A B C D 
01  …I was a ngry about my fatigue   -2 -4 -3 0 
02  …I was despondent about my fatigue   -3 -2 -3 0 
03  …I was sad about my fatigue   -1 -2 -5 2 
04  …I was miserable about my fatigue   -1 -5 -1 1 
05  …I was frustrated if I was too tired to do things I  wanted to do  1 -1 -1 4 
06  …I felt useless because of my fatigue   0 -5 -3 0 
07  …I was worried about my fatigue   -2 -3 -3 -4 
08  …I was embarrassed about my fatigue   -2 -4 -4 -2 
09  …I was upset about my fatigue   -4 -4 -4 -1 
10  …I got irritated quickly because of my fatigue   -4 -2 1 2 
11  …I wasn’t able to do anything because of my fatigue   0 0 0 2 
12  …my fatigue prevented me from any physical activity  (walking, cycling, sports, etc.)  -1 4 0 2 
13  …I was too tired to do any chores in and around the  house   1 1 0 -1 
     (cl eaning, cooking, gardening, etc.)       
14  …my fatigue meant it was difficult to do the shoppi ng   -1 2 0 0 
15  …my fatigue had a negative influence on the relatio nship with my partner and/  -4 0 -1 -5 
     or others close to me       
16  …my fatigue restric ted in my contacts with family, friends and acquain tances  -1 -2 -4 2 
17  …I was too tired to help others   -2 1 1 1 
18  …I was too tired to do my most important tasks prop erly   0 1 -1 -1 
19  …my fatigue restricted me from doing pleasant or re laxing things   1 1 -1 3 
20  …my fatigue made me unhappy about my life   -6 -6 -2 -1 
21  …I experienced the fatigue as a handicap   -1 -3 -2 -2 
22  …I was also able to see positive sides of my fatigu e   3 -1 -1 -6 
23  …I have experienced different forms of fatigue   1 0 2 0 
24  …my fatigue was unpredictable   0 2 -2 -5 
25  …I was sometimes too tired to eat   -3 -1 -5 -2 
26  …I felt exhausted   -1 -1 1 -2 
27  …my fatigue would pass if I rested   4 3 3 -2 
28  …I was continually tired   -5 -2 -2 1 
29  …I was tired almost every day   -3 -3 0 3 
30  …the fatigue would take me by surprise   -3 3 -2 -3 
31  …I was only tired if I had done too much   5 2 4 -3 
32  …I tired quickly   2 -1 2 0 
33  …I also had days when I wasn’t tired at all   6 5 2 -3 
34  …I had difficulty thinking clearly when I was  tired   2 0 1 6 112 35  …I had difficulty concentrating when I was tired   3 0 2 4 
36  …I had a lot of energy   4 3 0 -4 
37  …I felt like doing lots of pleasant things   3 2 2 -4 
38  …I was often awake during the night   -5 4 0 5 
39  …I did not awake in the mornin g feeling refreshed   0 4 5 1 
40  …I took a nap during the day   0 2 5 -1 
41  …I couldn’t help falling asleep   1 1 -6 1 
42  …the fatigue made my body feel heavy   -1 1 2 0 
43  …the fatigue made me feel listless   -2 0 1 0 
44  …the fatigue made me feel mentally  worn out   2 -1 0 -1 
45  …my fatigue also resulted in other rheumatic sympto ms   0 -1 1 3 
46  …others helped me with my fatigue by doing things f or me   -2 0 1 -2 
47  …others were understanding about my fatigue   2 1 3 1 
48  …I didn’t let on to anyone that I was tired   0 5 3 1 
49  …I was able to cope well with my fatigue   5 6 4 -1 
50  …it varied how well I could cope with my fatigue   4 -2 3 3 
51  …I found it difficult to accept the fatigue   1 -3 -1 5 
52  …I tried everything to decrease my fatigue   1 0 -1 -1 
53 …I sought distraction when I was tired   2 3 0 2 
54  …I just carried on, however tired I was   3 0 4 1 
55  …I rested more because of my fatigue   0 2 1 0 
56  …my fatigue meant I had to plan everything I did   1 -1 -2 4 
57  …I tried to control my fatigue by s eeking a balance between activity and rest   2 1 6 -3 
 
Median factor scores -0.57 0.61 0.53 0.51 
Eigenvalues 3.70 3.46 3.36 1.57 
Percentages variance explained 12 12 11 5 
 
Items with differences in factor scores between the  groups ≥ 3 are marked in gray. These items are abl e to 
distinguish between the groups, meaning they are re levant items to describe and distinguish fatigue exp erience. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
113 Table A3 Agreement and disagreement with distinguishing item s in the four groups 
Group Agreement with statement   Disagreement with statem ent 
   (factor score)    (factor score)  
A 33: having days without any fatigue (+6)  20: fat igue makes them unhappy about  
31: only being tired if too much    their life (-6)  
undertaken (+5)    28: being continually tired (-5) 
49: good coping competencies (+5)   38: often being awake during the  
36: having a lot of energy (+4)    night (-5)  
27: fatigue would pass if they rested (+4)  9: bein g upset about fatigue (-4) 
50: varying ability to cope well with their    10: getting irritated quickly because 
fatigue (+4)    of fatigue (-4) 
      15: negative influence of fatigue on 
      relationship with partner and/or others 
      close to them (-4) 
B 49: good coping competencies (+6)  20: fatigue ma kes them unhappy about 
 33: having days without any fatigue (+5)  their li fe (-6) 
48: not showing fatigue to anyone (+5)  6: feeling useless because of fatigue (-5) 
38: often being awake during the   4: being miserable about fatigue (-5)  
 night (+4)     1: being angry about fatigue (-4) 
 39: unrefreshing sleep (+4)   9: being upset about  fatigue (-4) 
 12: fatigue prevents them from any    
 physical activity (+4) 
C 57: trying to control fatigue by seeking   41: falling  asleep unintendedly (-6) 
 balance between activity and rest (+6)  3: being s ad about fatigue (-5) 
 40: taking a nap during the day (+5)  25: being too tired to eat (-5)  
 39: unrefreshing sleep (+5)   9: being upset about  fatigue (-4) 
 31: only being tired if too much    16: being rest ricted in contacts with 
undertaken (+4)    family, friends and acquaintance s 
 54: just carrying on when they were    because of fatigue (-4)  
 fatigued (+4)      
 49: good coping competencies (+4)   
D 34: difficulties thinking clearly when  22: seeing positive aspects of fatigue (-6) 
 they are tired (+6)    24: fatigue being unpredict able (-5) 
 38: often being awake during the    15: negative i nfluence of fatigue on 
 night (+5)     relationship with partner and/or ot hers 
 51: difficulties to accept fatigue (+5)  close to them (-5)  
 5: being frustrated when too tired to do   36: having  a lot of energy (-4) 
 things they want to do (+4)   37: feeling like doing lots of  
 56: having to plan everything they  pleasant things  (-4) 
 do because of fatigue (+4)    
35: having difficulties concentrating 
 when they are tired (+4)  
Statements are reported in bold letters if they wer e not only able to distinguish between groups in ge neral 
(differences in factor scores between groups were ≥  3), but also distinguished one group from all the others 
(difference of ≥ 3 between its factor score and the  factor scores of the three other groups). 
 114  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
115  
 
 
Chapter 6 
 
 
 
Selection of items for a computer-adaptive test to  
measure fatigue in patients with rheumatoid arthrit is:  
a Delphi approach  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S. Nikolaus 
C. Bode 
E. Taal 
M.A.F.J. van de Laar  
 
Qual Life Res. Published online 31 July 2011. doi: 10.1007/s11136-011-9982-8 116 ABSTRACT 
 
Purpose  Computer-adaptive tests (CATs) can measure precise ly at individual level with 
few items selected from an item bank. Our aim was t o select fatigue items to develop a 
CAT for rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and include exper t opinions that are important for 
content validity of measurement instruments.  
Methods  Items were included from existing fatigue question naires and generated from 
interview material. In a Delphi procedure, rheumato logists, nurses, and patients evaluated 
the initial pool of 294 items. Items were selected for the CAT development if rated as 
adequate by at least 80% of the participants (when 50% or less agreed, they were 
excluded). Remaining items were adjusted based on p articipants’ comments and re-
evaluated in the next round. The procedure stopped when all items were selected or 
rejected.  
Results  A total of 10 rheumatologists, 20 nurses, and 15 r heumatoid arthritis patients 
participated. After the first round, 96 of 294 item s were directly selected. Nine items were 
directly excluded, and remaining items were adjuste d. In the second round, 124 items 
were presented for reevaluation. Ultimately, 245 it ems were selected.  
Conclusion  This study revealed a qualitatively evaluated item  pool to be used for the item 
bank/CAT development. The Delphi procedure is a ben eficial approach to select adequate 
items for measuring fatigue in RA.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
117 INTRODUCTION 
 
Computerized adaptive testing allows comprehensive measurement of patient-reported 
outcomes (PROs) with relatively few items. 1 Items are, respectively, selected from an item 
bank, based on a patient’s previous answer, so that  precise measurement at individual 
level with few items becomes possible. For the comp uterized selection of the best 
matching items, a large item pool is needed that co ntains more items than are presented 
to a patient. 2 Before a computer-adaptive test (CAT) can be devel oped, such an item pool 
has to be scaled according to item response theory (IRT). With IRT, item parameters as the 
difficulty level can be assessed for each item inde pendently. 2 This information is required 
to ideally match the items to the patient’s individ ual level and for inter-individual 
comparisons on the measured construct even if patie nts filled in different items. Primarily, 
CATs were used for ability and achievement testing,  but the interest in computerized 
adaptive testing for health-related measures is gro wing, 3 such as attempts to use it for 
cognitive testing in dementia 4 or assessment of cancer-related fatigue. 5,6  Furthermore, a 
joint initiative is currently developing a Patient- Reported Outcome Measurement 
Information System (PROMIS) that aims to construct a large item bank and computerized 
adaptive testing system for assessing patient-repor ted outcomes in chronic diseases. 7 
Nevertheless, few computerized adaptive testing app lications are validated and 
implemented in medical settings so far. 3 Recently constructed CATs for depression, 
anxiety, and stress perception appeared to be relia ble, valid, and efficient instruments 
that measure more precisely than traditional questi onnaires. 8–12  Moreover, as they are 
shorter, the burden for patients is reduced.  
Also, measurement of fatigue in rheumatoid arthriti s (RA) could benefit from this new 
measurement methodology and technology. RA is a chr onic autoimmune disease and is 
characterized by inflammation of the joints.RA is a  chronic autoimmune disease and is 
characterized by inflammation of the joints. 13  Many RA patients experience fatigue 14,15  
and rate it as one of their most annoying symptoms.16,17  The number of studies on RA 
incorporating fatigue as outcome has rapidly increa sed over the last years. Experts 
endorse the inclusion of fatigue in the core set of  outcome variables in clinical trials. 18,19  
Measuring fatigue provides additional information o n disease outcomes that does not 
overlap other established measures of RA and is ess ential for the understanding of the 
patients’ perspective. 20  Qualitative studies on the experience of fatigue i n RA have shown 
that patients experience fatigue as a multidimensio nal, annoying symptom with far-
reaching consequences. 21–24   
Several multi-item questionnaires are used in clini cal practice and research. Hewlett et al. 
conducted a systematic review of measurements of fa tigue in RA, 25  whereby a validation 118 list was applied covering validity (face validity, content validity, criterion, and construct 
validity), reliability (internal consistency and st ability), and sensitivity to change and 
feasibility. This review has shown that reasonable evidence for validity in RA was found for 
only four of the used questionnaires: Short Form 36  subscale vitality (SF-36), 26  Functional 
Assessment of Chronic Illness Therapy Fatigue Scale  (FACIT-F), 27  Profile of Mood States 
subscale fatigue/inertia (POMS), 28  and the Multidimensional Assessment of Fatigue Sca le 
(MAF). 29  However, none of these met all criteria for validi ty, so further validation in RA 
patients is needed. 25  The main problem concerned content validity; a lim itation of these 
traditional instruments is that the perspective of RA patients was not included during their 
development. For instance, instruments include item s that reflect disability or 
inflammation in RA rather than fatigue. 25  Moreover, different time frames are used in the 
questionnaires: the past 4 weeks, the past 7 days, right now, and the past week. It is not 
clear which time frame is the most appropriate.  
The Bristol RA Fatigue Multi-Dimensional Questionna ire (BRAF-MDQ) 30  is a new 
instrument, recently developed and evaluated in a B ritish RA population. Although it has 
not yet been tested in other countries, the BRAF-MD Q is promising since it was developed 
from the patient’s perspective with interviews, foc us groups, and cognitive testing. The 
aim of this study was to select items for the devel opment of a CAT for fatigue in RA.  
Before IRT analyses can be conducted, an adequate i tem pool must be designed. In the 
development of the stress- CAT, for example, items from fixed-length questionnaires were 
collected and subsequently selected. Items were ind ependently rated according to their 
ability to represent the construct under considerat ion by five members of the research 
team. In cases of non-agreement, items were openly discussed and rated again. Only 
items achieving full consensus for inclusion remain ed in the item bank. 12   
It is not yet clear how valid existing fatigue ques tionnaires are for RA, especially for the 
Dutch RA population. Moreover, we did not know how much face validity the items 
generated from the interviews would have. Therefore , we opted for an extensive Delphi 
approach and let patients, rheumatologists, and nur ses evaluate fatigue items. With the 
Delphi technique, opinions are collected individual ly by a questionnaire in at least two 
rounds accompanied with systematic feedback on the results of the previous round, 
aiming to reach consensus about a certain topic amo ng a group of experts. 31  The opinion 
of patients and professionals in the field is essen tial in the development of questionnaire 
items to ensure content validity. 32,33  Only patients can report on the subjective experie nce 
of fatigue 34,35  as clinicians have the most experience with the ou tward manifestation of a 
symptom or condition. 34   
In our Delphi study, we presented a question about the appropriate time frame to 
measure fatigue in RA and included all fatigue item s from traditional questionnaires (SF- 
119 36, POMS, FACIT-F,MAF), the BRAF-MDQ, and newly ite ms generated from interview 
material and other questionnaires. The four traditi onal scales were included since they 
turned out to be the most adequate in RA; 25  moreover, we were interested in the experts’ 
evaluation thereof because their perspective had no t been included in the scale 
development. Our aim was to check whether our item pool contained all relevant aspects 
to assess fatigue in RA and whether items and respo nse options were adequate and clear.  
This paper focuses on the method of the Delphi stud y as able to select CAT items for 
clinical populations and the appropriate time frame  to measure fatigue in RA. Related 
concise papers discuss which dimensions of fatigue should be measured 36  and report on 
the evaluation of the traditional questionnaires an d the BRAF-MDQ. 37   
 
 
METHODS 
 
Delphi process  
With the Delphi process. 38  opinions about a certain topic can be collected by  a 
questionnaire, which is sent by (electronic) mail t o a panel of potential participants who 
then fill it out individually. Contrary to group di scussion, it is avoided that especially more 
dominant participants express their opinion. So the  phenomenon of ‘‘group think’’ cannot 
obstruct the viewing of different opinions. A Delph i study consists of at least two rounds 
and aims to reach consensus among the participants.  After each Delphi round, systematic 
feedback on the results of the previous round is pr ovided to the participants. 31  By doing 
so, the experts are informed about the opinions tha t are present in the group. The extent 
of agreement is determined by statistical measures as no in person meetings are 
conducted.  
 
Preparation of the item pool  
In our aim to develop a CAT for fatigue in RA, we n eeded a large and comprehensive item 
pool to cover all dimensions of the fatigue experie nce in RA. We included the items of the 
validated Dutch versions of those multi-item questi onnaires for which reasonable 
evidence of validity in RA could be identified 25 : RAND SF-36 subscale vitality, 39  FACIT-F, 40  
POMS subscale fatigue/inertia, 41  and MAF. 42  We also included all items of the BRAF-MDQ, 
which we translated from English into Dutch using t he recommended cross-cultural 
translation procedure. 43  All items of these five scales were sorted accordi ng to their 
dimension (e.g., frequency, duration, severity, con sequences). This was supplemented 
with additional items based on interview material o n the experience of fatigue in patients 
with RA 24  and used in our previous Q-sort study. 44  To check for possibly missing aspects, 120 we also looked at fatigue questionnaires that are n ot validated in RA. To ensure that the 
most prominent fatigue questionnaires were included  in our check, recent papers 
reviewing fatigue scales were used as a guide. 25,45–51  We systematically compared our item 
pool with the fatigue items included in the prelimi nary PROMIS fatigue item bank 52  and 
other fatigue questionnaires as the Checklist Indiv idual Strength (CIS), Cancer Fatigue 
Scale (CFS), Chronic Fatigue Syndrome— Activities a nd Participation Questionnaire (CFS-
APQ), Fatigue Assessment Instrument (FAI), Function al Impact of Fatigue (FIS), Fatigue 
Questionnaire (FQ), Lee fatigue scale, Multidimensi onal Fatigue Inventory (MFI), 
Multidimensional Fatigue Symptom Inventory (MFSI), Piper scale, Profile of Fatigue (ProF), 
and Wu fatigue scale. About 70 additional items wer e constructed as a result of these 
questionnaires and added to our item pool.  
This procedure resulted in a large item pool of 294  items, spread over 12 dimensions of 
fatigue (severity, frequency, duration, changes in fatigue, perceived causes of fatigue, 
energy, sleep/rest, body feeling, cognition/concent ration, coping, negative 
emotions/mood, consequences, see Table 1). These we re based on dimensions of the 
existing fatigue questionnaires and were supplement ed with additional dimensions that 
came out of our Q-sort study and interview studies on the experience of fatigue. 21–24  Items 
taken from an already existing measurement scale we re included in their original 
formulation and with original response options so t hat the item pool ultimately included 
items with different kinds of formulations (e.g., s tatements, questions) and response 
options (e.g., level of agreement, frequency). 
  
 
Participants and data collection  
We contacted the experts (40 rheumatologists, 40 nu rses, and 31 patients) by e-mail, 
informing them about the study and requesting their  participation. E-mail addresses of 
patients were collected from the database of Patien t Research Partners of the Arthritis 
Centre Twente and those of rheumatologists and nurs es from the member lists of a Dutch 
professional association in Rheumatology (NVR) and the DREAM registry. When selecting 
potential participants, we aspired to reach a distr ibuted sample across the Netherlands. E-
mails included a link to the online survey. We used  SurveyMonkey 53  to build the Delphi 
questionnaire, in which the fatigue aspects and ite ms were presented. The questions 
posed are displayed in Table 2.  
 
 
 
  
121  
Table 1  Overview of fatigue dimensions and number of selec ted items  
Dimension (original  Meaning of the dimension            Number of finally 
number of items)                 selected items  
Severity (16)    Intensity of fatigue       5   
Frequency (11)    Occurrence of fatigue       9  
Duration (6)    Presence of fatigue over time      5   
Changes in fatigue (7)    Variability and unpredict ability of fatigue     9  
Perceived causes of fatigue (17)   Circumstances th at according to patients  
influence their fatigue      18  
Energy (22)    Amount of energy, for example, to  
undertake an activity       18  
Sleep/rest (19)    Patients’ need for sleep or rest       14  
Body feeling (26)    Feeling/manifestation of fatig ue in  
the body        15  
Cognition/concentration (18)   Impact of fatigue on  the ability to  
concentrate or on tasks that require thinking    15  
Coping (33)    Ways of dealing with fatigue, for exa mple,  
used strategies or thoughts about fatigue     23  
Negative emotions/mood (30)   Negative emotions or mood caused  
by fatigue        29  
Consequences (89)    Impact of fatigue on daily lif e      85 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 2  Structure of Delphi questionnaire  
Participants were asked to…  
1. Indicate whether they agree with a time frame of  the last 7 days (we presented an example question a nd 
participants could choose between the answers ‘‘agr ee with’’ or ‘‘not agree with’’ and give reasons fo r their 
choice)  
2. Judge the selected dimensions of fatigue for imp ortance on a 4-point Likert scale: very important, rather 
important, less important, and not at all important   
3. Indicate how appropriate they thought the select ed items described each dimension on a 4-point Like rt scale: 
very appropriate, rather appropriate, less appropri ate, and not at all appropriate  
4. Give comments and suggestions in the blank field s available under each question, e.g., give reasons  for their 
evaluation of the items and their response format  
5. Nominate other dimensions of fatigue and related  items to be included in a comprehensive measure of  fatigue 
 
 
 
 122 The questionnaire was piloted with one patient and one professional. Both rated the 
invitation e-mail, the questionnaire, and the instr uctions as clear and feasible. After each 
round, the data were analyzed and summarized using SPSS 18.  
A main characteristic of the Delphi procedure is th at after each round, participants are 
given feedback information about the results of the  previous round. For the items that 
had to be re-evaluated in round 2, information abou t its evaluation in the previous round 
was provided by presenting the item from round 1, w ith a brief summary of the given 
comments, and then the adjusted item. Also, newly c reated items, based on the 
participants’ comments and suggestions, were presen ted in round 2. Items had to be 
evaluated in the same way as in round 1.  
The amount of time our respondents had to invest wa s rather large: completing the 
questionnaire of round 1 required about 1 h, wherea s the questionnaire of round 2 still 
required about 45 min.  
In the first round, 15 patients, 10 rheumatologists , and 20 nurses returned the completed 
questionnaire (N = 45); a response rate of 40.5%. P rofessionals worked at 21 hospitals 
spread over the Netherlands (see acknowledgment). I n the second round, 80% of the 
participants of the first round (15 nurses, 13 pati ents, and 8 rheumatologists) participated 
(N = 36). In both rounds, our expert panel clearly consisted of more women than men, and 
the mean age was 51.4 (SD = 11.4) in the first roun d and 52.4 (SD = 10.5) in the second. 
For details of the samples, see Table 3.  
 
 
 
 
Table 3  Gender and age of the participants in round 1 and round 2  
Group    Round 1     Round 2  
Gender (N)    Mean age    Gender (N)    Mean age 
(female/male)    (in years)    (female/male)   (in years) 
Patients           13/2   57.3 (SD = 11.4)           11/2   57.7 (SD = 10.3) 
Rheumatologists           1/9   54.4 (SD = 10.8)            1/7   54.9 (SD = 12.1)  
Nurses          19/1  45.4 (SD = 8.8)                    14/1   46.5 (SD = 6.8)  
Total         33/12   51.4 (SD = 11.4)         26/1 0            52.4 (SD = 10.5) 
 
 
 
 
 
  
123 Analysis—criteria for item selection  
In Delphi studies, different rules for defining suf ficient consensus are applied, 31  ranging 
from 55 to 80%. To establish the rule for our study , we searched the literature for other 
Delphi studies in health research. Repeatedly, the criterion of 80% was used for selection 
of an item or topic, as for EULAR recommendations. 54  Based on these examples, we also 
applied the conservative criterion of 80% agreement . Further properties of our rule were 
developed in discussion among the authors to meet o ur special situation with different 
expert groups.  
An item was directly selected for inclusion in the CAT item pool if 80% or more of the 
participants rated it as appropriate (response opti ons ‘‘very appropriate’’ and ‘‘rather 
appropriate’’). An item rated as appropriate by 50%  or less of the participants was directly 
excluded from the CAT item pool.  
Besides the global percentage, we also calculated t he percentages per expert group. If the 
mean percentage was high (80%) or low (50%) enough,  but one group had a percentage of 
more than 10% different from the criterion (below 7 0% or above 60%), the item was not 
directly selected or removed. These and also those items rated as appropriate by 50–80% 
of the experts were discussed by the authors and ad apted according to the participants’ 
comments and suggestions and re-evaluated if necess ary. If the same comment was raised 
by at least two participants, the item was adapted.  The adapted items were judged again 
in round 2 by the panel. After round 2, comments we re discussed among the researchers 
and the final decision about in- or exclusion of th e items was made.  
 
 
RESULTS 
 
Time frame  
Round 1  
Precisely 80% of the experts agreed with a time fra me of the last 7 days (patients 86.7%, 
rheumatologists 70%, and nurses 80%). Nevertheless,  many comments were still given on 
the time frame. Some participants argued that a lon ger time frame would be more 
appropriate, because it would give a more reliable reflection of the experienced fatigue. 
They mentioned acute conditions like an infection o r other physical reasons or complaints, 
weather, medication, stress, or mood that could aff ect fatigue. Using a longer time frame 
would be less sensitive to such circumstances. An a rgument for using a shorter time frame 
than 7 days was that it can be difficult to precise ly remember the fatigue, so that people 
often give answers based on the last 2 or 3 days an d how they feel today. Due to these 
comments, we decided to ask about the time frame ag ain in the second round. We 124 showed a summary of the comments to the experts and  asked whether they would prefer 
a time frame of the last 7 days or whether they wou ld prefer a longer time frame of the 
last 14 days.  
 
Round 2  
The majority of participants (64%) preferred the sh orter 7-day time frame. Although this 
percentage did not reach our 80% criterion, we chos e to use this time frame in our 
instrument. Convincing arguments for this decision were that the changing character of 
fatigue and possible acute circumstances can also e ffect questions concerning the last 14 
days and that the danger of recall bias increases w ith the length of the used time frame.  
 
Items  
Round 1  
Step 1: An immediate decision could be made on 105 of the 294 items: 96 items were 
rated as appropriate by at least 80% of the partici pants so that they were immediately 
selected. Nine items were rejected because they wer e rated as appropriate by 50% or less. 
These rejected items are displayed in Table 4.  
 
 
 
Table 4 Rejected items due to negative evaluation by experts  in round 1 
Item     Comments    Origin 
Severity 
Over the past 7 days I felt   Too negative, dramati c, extreme or   POMS 
bushed. 1 not at all / 2 a little   exaggerated. Ite m could be confusing  
/ 3 moderately / 4 quite a bit  because it could al so be related to physical   
5 extremely   circumstances as loss of strength in t he  
joints, or could have a psychological  
component such as depressive feelings. 
      
How severe is the fatigue 1   It is assumed that exhaustion is always  MAF 
which you have been   present. It is not possible t o measure 
experiencing during the  exhaustion with the used sca le since you 
past week?     can only be exhausted or not, and 
1 – 10 / 1 mild, 10 severe  exhaustion is always ser ious. 
      
During the past 7 days I was  This item is difficul t to grade,   Interviews 
so tired that I could only sit  confusing, and too cursory. It contains 
and stare. -6 - +6 / -6 Not at  two questions (abou t sit and about stare),  
all applicable, +6 Totally  and it could also measu re depression and 
applicable    sounds very negative.   
  
125 Item     Comments    Origin 
  
During the past 7 days I was  The response options were rated as not  Interviews 
so tired that even the tiniest  appropriate, and th e item as unclear, too 
movement seemed too  dramatic and probably related to other 
strenuous. -6 - +6 / -6 Not at  aspects than fatigu e. 
all applicable, +6 Totally 
applicable 
 
Energy 
During the past 7 days I felt  This item was unclea r for many   Lee fatigue 
efficient. 1 – 100 / 1 not at  participants. Furthe rmore it could also  scale 
all efficient, 100 extremely  refer to depression. 
efficient 
 
Body feeling 
During the past 7 days I had  This item has too man y response options,  Interviews 
a prickly feeling in my feet  could apply more to f ibromyalgy patients, 
when I was tired.  -6 - +6 / -  could be related to  other diseases as 
6 Not at all applicable, +6  polyneuropathy, lack o f vitamine B12 etc. 
Totally applicable    
 
During the past 7 days I had  This item has too man y response options  Interviews 
a headache when I was tired.  and does not refer to  RA. A headache can 
-6 - +6 / -6 Not at all   have many causes, is more  applicable to 
applicable, +6 Totally applicable  women than to me n. 
 
During the last 7 days I kept  This item has too ma ny response options.  Interviews 
yawning when I was   It is doubtful what the releva nce is as 
tired. -6 - +6 / -6 Not at all  sleep disorders wil l not be assessed. 
applicable, +6 Totally   Yawning is a symptom but a ll people do 
applicable    this. 
 
Negative emotions / mood 
Over the past 7 days, have  Item is unclear and too  difficult.   BRAF-MDQ 
you felt embarrassed 
because of fatigue? 
Not at all, a little, quite a bit, 
very much 
1 in Dutch translated as „exhaustion“ 
 
 
 
 
 126 Step 2: The remaining 189 items were discussed by t he authors whereby the participants’ 
comments and suggestions were taken into account. T he authors decided to select 60 
items (whereby one item was split into two) for inc lusion in the item pool when the 
criticism did not concern the content of the item ( e.g., a change in formulation such as 
replacement/deletion of a word/phrase) or when it m erely referred to the response 
options or suggested placing an item under another dimension. For an example of such 
adaptations, see Table 5.  
 
 
Table 5  Example for small adaptations in selection by autho rs 
Item in round 1   Comments   Adapted and selected i tem 
Response options 
During the past 7 days, I have   The response optio ns are During the past 7 days, I  
fallen asleep without wanting to.   not clear, they  are   have fallen asleep without  
- 6 to + 6 / -6 Not at all applicable  confusing.   wanting to. 1 often,  
+ 6 Totally applicable      2 sometimes, 3 rarely,  
       4 never     
Formulation 
Over the past 7 days, have you  Unclear / difficult    Over the past 7 days, have 
lacked physical  energy   formulation, better to use  you lacked bo dily  energy 
because of fatigue?   “bodily” instead of    becaus e of fatigue? 
Not at all, a little, quite a bit,  “physical”, wit h “bodily”  Not at all, a little, quite  
very much    the item would be clear.  a bit, very much 
         
 
 
Having received comments with convincing arguments against their inclusion, the authors 
also decided to remove eight items from the item po ol. One example was ‘‘The fatigue I 
feel now is worse than the fatigue I felt before I had rheumatoid arthritis.’’ Experts 
commented as follows: ‘‘This is asking for somethin g you already know. Patients 
experience the fatigue as different but that does n ot automatically mean that it is worse—
it’s more about quality than about severity. You as k patients to compare apples with 
oranges (fatigue vs. tiredness). Question is only a pplicable to patients with a short disease 
duration.’’  
 
Step 3: The remaining 121 items had to be re-evalua ted in the second round (most of 
them in an adapted version). An example of such an adapted item is question 2 of the 
FACIT-F: ‘‘During the past 7 days, I felt weak all over (0 not at all, 1 a little bit, 2 somewhat, 
3 quite a bit, and 4 very much)’’ (in the Dutch tra nslation: helemaal niet, een beetje,  
127 enigzins, in vrij hoge mate, in zeer hoge mate). Pa rticipants evaluated the response 
options as unclear and the item as vaguely formulat ed and unclear. Consequently, we 
changed the item to: ‘‘During the past 7 days, my f atigue made me feel weak (1 not at all, 
2 a little, 3 rather, and 4 to a great extent)’’ (i n Dutch: helemaal niet, een beetje, nogal, in 
sterke mate). Another example: ‘‘During the past 7 days, I wanted to do all kinds of nice 
things (-6 Not at all applicable and +6 Totally app licable).’’ Comments: The response 
options are unclear and ‘‘wanted to’’ does not say anything about its feasibility. Hence, we 
made the following adaptations: ‘‘During the past 7  days, I had enough energy to do nice 
things (1 always, 2 usually, 3 sometimes, 4 rarely,  and 5 never).’’  
Based on the comments regarding missing aspects, tw o new items were constructed and 
included in round 2. One item was split into two, b ringing the number of items that had to 
be evaluated in round 2 to 124. Figure 1 gives an o verview of the item selections in the 
two Delphi rounds (see the appendix at the end of t his article).  
 
Round 2  
Step 1: As 58 of the 124 items were judged as appro priate by at least 80% of the 
participants in the second round, they were selecte d for the development of the CAT. Only 
one item had to be rejected due to 50% or less of t he participants rating it as appropriate. 
This item was constructed based on our interview ma terial: ‘‘During the past 7 days, I had 
an unpleasant feeling in my body when I was tired ( -6 Not at all applicable and +6 Totally 
applicable).’’ Based on the comments given, we adju sted the item to: ‘‘During the past 7 
days, my fatigue made me feel drowsy (1 not at all,  2 a little, 3 rather, and 4 to a great 
extent).’’ However, participants still rated this i tem as unclear.  
Step 2: The remaining 65 items were discussed by th e authors whereby the comments and 
suggestions of the participants were taken into acc ount. The researchers decided to select 
30 items, which could be adjusted according to the participant’s comments. So some 
items that were rated as appropriate by more than 5 0% of the participants but did not 
reach the 80% criterion were included in the item p ool. These items were rated in a 
normative way by our expert panel. Some items refle cting strongly undesired or awesome 
aspects of fatigue were evaluated as not appropriat e. Professionals indicated that they 
could be confronting for patients, and patients rep orted that fatigue should not have so 
much impact on life. Simply excluding those items w ould be problematic for the 
construction of a CAT as items measuring all levels  of fatigue, also extreme ones (in 
methodological terms: difficult items), are needed for precise measurement. Therefore, 
we made use of a slightly modified Delphi approach to ensure the quality of our item pool 
for the CAT. In contrast, 35 items appeared to be i nsufficiently appropriate, even after the 
adaptations made after the first round. In cases wh ere comments still indicated the same 128 problems as in the first round or where new points of concern emerged which could not 
be solved by a simple adaptation of the item (e.g.,  another formulation or using other 
response options), items were removed. So after the  second round, all items could be 
selected or rejected, and no third round was necess ary.  
The classification of items into the dimensions was  also satisfactory: only 6 of 245 finally 
selected items had to be placed under another dimen sion than presented in round 1.  
 
 
DISCUSSION 
 
This Delphi study resulted in a large item pool con sisting of 245 items that were rated as 
adequate by patients and professionals to measure f atigue in RA. Moreover, it provided 
insights into problems regarding the measurement th ereof.  
Our first question was about the appropriate time f rame to measure fatigue. The 
questionnaire items of the scales included in this study had different time frames and 
response options. We chose to use the original resp onse options. For a CAT, this is no 
problem because as only one item is simultaneously displayed on the computer screen, 
patients will not be confused by different response  options. In the CAT for depression, 10  
also items with different response formats were inc luded and even different recall periods 
were used. Although most patients did not express a ny concerns, it is not yet clear if and 
how the different formats influence patients’ answe rs. Different response formats might 
increase the patients’ concentration while completi ng the CAT. In contrast, a continually 
changing time frame would not be feasible. 33  So our aim was the decision for one time 
frame, and after round 2, we chose the time frame o f the last 7 days. Lai et al. 55  compared 
self-reported fatigue in cancer patients using a ti me frame of the last 7 days and the last 4 
weeks. At item level, some items provided more info rmation when asking about the last 7 
days, while others provided more information when a sking about the last 4 weeks. 
Regarding information at scale level, the 7-day tim e frame provided slightly more 
information than the 4-week time frame. The authors  concluded that both time frames 
are appropriate but recommend using the 7-day time frame as it is more informative. 55  
This recommendation is in accordance with the opini on of the majority of participants in 
the current study. Nevertheless, our decision remai ns disputable. In the first round, 80% 
of the participants agreed with a time frame of the  last 7 days when asked to choose 
between agreement and non-agreement. When given the  choice between 7 and 14 days 
in round 2, only 64% preferred the 7-day time frame . This is no huge majority, and it 
reflects the experts’ perspective that no ideal sol ution exists for the question which time 
frame should be used.   
129 Furthermore, we wanted to investigate which items a re appropriate for measuring fatigue 
in RA. A notable number of the rejected items came from the interview material. This 
suggests that it is not sufficient to transform pat ients’ stories directly into items when 
measuring fatigue. Items based on patients’ stories  have to undergo further expert checks 
to find the right formulation. Before starting to d evelop a scale and its related statistical 
analyses, further evaluation by experts is recommen ded. We also found that only 40% of 
the items from traditional questionnaires (SF-36, P OMS, FACIT-F, MAF) were clear and 
adequate in their original style for at least 80% o f the participants. 37  This finding further 
underlines the relevance of the perspective of prof essionals and patients in the 
development of measurement instruments for fatigue in RA. Generally, it appeared that 
items should be formulated as clearly and briefly a s possible. The same applies to the 
response options: clearly distinguishable and not t oo many.  
Some experts commented on the importance of careful  use of different terms for fatigue, 
with the Dutch frequently using the words ‘‘moeheid ’’ and ‘‘vermoeidheid’’. Although 
comparable, the difference between these words is n ot exactly the same as between 
‘‘tiredness’’ and ‘‘fatigue’’ in the English langua ge. Experts indicated that they associate 
the word ‘‘vermoeidheid’’ with being fatigued for a  reason and with being more seriously 
fatigued than with the word ‘‘moeheid’’. Our item p ool also contained several items 
referring to ‘‘moe’’ or ‘‘moeheid’’ instead of ‘‘ve rmoeidheid’’ in an endeavor to measure 
the entire range of fatigue and thereby also less s evere fatigue.  
Remarkable is that most of the experts in this stud y were female. This reflects the gender 
distribution in RA 13  and the fact that most nurses are still women. 56  Nevertheless, it is 
important not to neglect the perspective of men in future studies.  
It is beyond question that the perspective of exper ts is essential for the development of 
questionnaire items. Nevertheless, it appeared that  a Delphi approach has its limitations. 
The experts’ comments showed that patients and prof essionals tended to evaluate the 
fatigue items in a normative way. Items reflecting a rather annoying impact of fatigue 
were sometimes judged as inadequate with the explan ation that these could be 
confronting for patients (professionals’ perspectiv e) or that they do not want the fatigue 
to have so much impact (patients’ perspective). The  idea that undesired aspects should be 
omitted is especially problematic when constructing  a CAT. For a precise measurement, 
the item pool also requires items referring to an e xtreme impact of fatigue, meaning that 
items are also needed that might have a moral impli cation for patients and professionals. 
Therefore, it was important to discuss items among the authors and to scrutinize the 
comments given when deciding on in- or exclusion of  an item. Furthermore, comments 
from patients showed that some of them had difficul ties distinguishing the value of an 
item for measuring fatigue in general from their ow n experience and with their potential 130 answer. Patients may have rated some items as inapp ropriate because they were not 
applicable to their own fatigue. Because of this, w e chose to include some items that did 
not reach our 80% criterion, meaning a slight devia tion from the conservative decision 
rule.  
For participants, an important disadvantage of this  Delphi approach was the length of time 
it took. Therefore, we think that our response rate  of 40.5% (111 invitations and 45 
participants in round 1) is quite satisfactory. As fewer comments were given in the last 
part of the questionnaire, we compensated for this by reversing the order of 
dimensions/items in the second round. Also, for the  researchers, the study was time-
consuming due to the large number of items that had  to be prepared and presented in the 
online questionnaire, and the huge amount of data t hat had to be analyzed in two rounds.  
Although the Delphi procedure has some bottlenecks,  it is a valuable method to include 
the opinions of experts in a thorough development o f dimensions and items for a 
measurement instrument. We assume that our item poo l is comprehensive and adequate 
for the measurement of fatigue in RA. It will be us ed in our next study in which the items 
will be calibrated according to IRT.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
131 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  
 
We would like to thank the participants in this stu dy; patients from the forum of Patient 
Research Partners of the Arthritis Centre Twente; a nd rheumatologists and nurses from 
Universitair Medisch Centrum Groningen, Medisch Cen trum Leeuwarden, Ziekenhuisgroep 
Twente, Zorg Groep Twente, Medisch Spectrum Twente,  St. Maartenskliniek Nijmegen, 
TweeSteden Ziekenhuis Locatie Tilburg, Universitair  Medisch Centrum Utrecht, Rijnstate 
Ziekenhuis Arnhem, Meander Medisch Centrum Amersfoo rt, Ziekenhuis Gelderse Vallei 
Ede, Medisch Centrum Haaglanden s-Gravenhage, Twees teden Ziekenhuis Tilburg, Evean 
Thuiszorg Purmerend, Streekziekenhuis Midden Twente  Hengelo, Isala Klinieken Zwolle, 
Albert Schweitzer ziekenhuis Dordrecht, Spaarne Zie kenhuis Hoofddorp, 
Scheperziekenhuis Emmen, Thuiszorg West- Brabant Ro osendal, Omring thuiszorg Hoorn.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 132 REFERENCES 
 
1. Rose M, Bezjak A. Logistics of collecting patien t-reported outcomes (PROs) in clinical 
practice: an overview and practical examples. Qual Life Res 2009;18:125–136.  
2. Hambleton RK, Swaminathan H, Rogers HJ. Fundamen tals of Item response theory. 
Thousand Oaks: Sage, 1991.   
3. Walter OB. Adaptive tests for measuring anxiety and depression. In: WJ van der Linden, 
CAW Glas eds. Elements of adaptive testing. New Yor k: Springer, 2010:123-136.  
4. Wouters H, Zwinderman AH, van Gool WA, Schmand B , Lindeboom R. Adaptive 
cognitive testing in dementia. Int J Methods Psychi atr Res 2009;18:118–127.  
5. Lai JS, Cella D, Chang CH, Bode RK, Heinemann AW . Item banking to improve, shorten 
and computerize self-reported fatigue: An illustrat ion of steps to create a core item bank 
from the FACIT-fatigue scale. Qual Life Res 2003;12 :485–501.  
6. Lai JS, Cella D, Dineen K, Bode R, von Roenn J, Gershon RC, et al. An item bank was 
created to improve the measurement of cancer-relate d fatigue. J Clin Epidemiol 
2005;58:190–197.  
7. Cella D, Yount S, Rothrock N, Gershon R, Cook K,  Reeve B, et al. The patient-reported 
outcomes measurement information system (PROMIS): P rogress of an NIH Roadmap 
Cooperative Group during its first two years. Med C are 2007;45:I3–I11.  
8. Fliege H, Becker J, Walter OB, Bjorner JB, Klapp  BF, Rose M. Development of a 
computer-adaptive test for depression (D-CAT). Qual  Life Res 2005;14:2277–2291.  
9. Walter OB, Becker J, Bjorner JB, Fliege F, Klapp  BF, Rose M. Development and 
evaluation of a computer adaptive test for ‘‘anxiet y’’ (Anxiety-CAT). Qual Life Res 
2007;16:143–155.  
10. Fliege H, Becker J, Walter OB, Rose M, Bjorner JB, Klapp BF. Evaluation of a computer-
adaptive test for the assessment of depression (D-C AT) in clinical application. Int J 
Methods Psychiatr Res 2009;18:23–36.  
11. Becker J, Fliege H, Kocalevent RD, Bjorner JB, Rose M, Walter OB, et al. Functioning 
and validity of a computerized adaptive test to mea sure anxiety (A-CAT). Depress Anxiety 
2008;25:182–194.  
12. Kocalevent RD, Rose M, Becker J, Walter OB, Fli ege H, Bjorner JB, et al. An evaluation 
of patient-reported outcomes found computerized ada ptive testing was efficient in 
assessing stress perception. J Clin Epidemiol 2009; 62:278–287.  
13. Kvien TK, Scherer HU, Burmester GH. Rheumatoid arthritis. In: JWJ Bijlsma ed. EULAR 
compendium on rheumatic diseases. London: BMJ Publi shing Group and European League 
Against Rheumatism, 2009:61-80.   
133 14. Wolfe F, Hawley DJ, Wilson K. The prevalence an d meaning of fatigue in rheumatic 
disease. J Rheumatol 1996;23:1407–1417.  
15. Belza BL, Henke CJ, Yelin EH, Epstein WV, Gilli ss CL. Correlates of fatigue in older adults 
with rheumatoid arthritis. Nurs Res 1993;42:93–99.  
16. Hewlett S, Carr M, Ryan S, Kirwan J, Richards P , Carr A, et al. Outcomes generated by 
patients with rheumatoid arthritis: how important a re they? Musculoskeletal Care 
2005;3:131–142.  
17. Kirwan JR, Newman S, Tugwell PS, Wells GA. Pati ent perspective on outcomes in 
rheumatology—a position paper for OMERACT 9. J Rheu matol 2009;36:2067–2070.  
18. Kirwan JR, Hewlett S. Patient perspective: reas ons and methods for measuring fatigue 
in rheumatoid arthritis. J Rheumatol 2007;34:1171–1 173.  
19. Kirwan JR, Minnock P, Adebajo A, Bresnihan B, C hoy E, de Wit M, et al. Patient 
perspective: fatigue as a recommended patient cente red outcome measure in rheumatoid 
arthritis. J Rheumatol 2007;34:1174–1177.  
20. Minnock P, Kirwan J, Bresnihan B. Fatigue is a reliable, sensitive and unique outcome 
measure in rheumatoid arthritis. Rheumatology 2009; 48:1533–1536.  
21. Belza Tack B. Fatigue in rheumatoid arthritis. Conditions, strategies, and 
consequences. Arthritis Care Res 1990;3:65–70.  
22. Hewlett S, Cockshott Z, Byron M, Kitchen K, Tip ler S, Pope D, et al. Patients’ 
perceptions of fatigue in rheumatoid arthritis: Ove rwhelming, uncontrollable, ignored. 
Arthritis Care Res 2005;53:697–702.  
23. Repping-Wuts H, Uitterhoeve R, van Riel P, van Achterberg T. Fatigue as experienced 
by patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA): A quali tative study. Int J Nurs Stud 
2008;45:995–1002.  
24. Nikolaus S, Bode C, Taal E, van de Laar MAFJ. N ew insights into the experience of 
fatigue among patients with rheumatoid arthritis: A  qualitative study. Ann Rheum Dis 
2010;69:895–897.  
25. Hewlett S, Hehir M, Kirwan JR. Measuring fatigu e in rheumatoid arthritis: A systematic 
review of scales in use. Arthritis Rheum 2007;57:42 9–439.  
26. Ware JE Jr., Sherbourne CD. The MOS 36-item sho rt-form health survey (SF-36). I. 
Conceptual framework and item selection. Med Care 1 992;30:473–483.  
27. Cella D, Yount S, Sorensen M, Chartash E, Sengu pta N, Grober J. Validation of the 
Functional Assessment of Chronic Illness Therapy Fa tigue Scale relative to other 
instrumentation in patients with rheumatoid arthrit is. J Rheumatol 2005;32:811–819.  
28. McNair D, Lorr M, Droppelman L. Profile of mood  states manual. New York: Multi-
health Systems Inc; 1992.  134 29. Belza Tack B. Dimensions and correlates of fati gue in older adults with rheumatoid 
arthritis (dissertation). San Francisco: University  of California; 1991.  
30. Nicklin J, Cramp F, Kirwan J, Greenwood R, Urba n M, Hewlett S. Measuring fatigue in 
rheumatoid arthritis: A cross-sectional study to ev aluate the Bristol Rheumatoid Arthritis 
Fatigue Multi-Dimensional questionnaire, visual ana logue scales, and numerical rating 
scales. Arthritis Care Res 2010;62:1559–1568.  
31. Powell C. The Delphi technique: Myths and reali ties. J Adv Nurs 2003; 41:376–382.  
32. Streiner DL, Norman GR. Health measurement scal es—a practical guide to their 
development and use. New York: Oxford University Pr ess; 2003.  
33. Fayers PM, Machin D. Quality of life—assessment , analysis and interpretation. 
Chichester: Wiley; 2000.  
34. Yorkston KM, Johnson K, Boesflug E, Skala J, Am tmann D. Communication about the 
experience of pain and fatigue in disability. Qual Life Res 2010;19:243–251.  
35. De Wit M. From orphan outcome to darling pet—pa tient participation at OMERACT 
and the emergence of fatigue as an important outcom e for research. Ann Rheum Dis 
2010;69(Suppl3):23.  
36. Nikolaus S, Bode C, Taal E, van de Laar MAFJ. W hich dimensions of fatigue should be 
measured in patients with rheumatoid arthritis?—a D elphi study. Musculoskeletal Care. 
Published online 11 November 2011. doi:10.1002/msc. 222.  
37. Nikolaus S, Bode C, Taal E, van de Laar MAFJ (i n press). Experts’ evaluations of fatigue 
questionnaires used in rheumatoid arthritis—a Delph i study among patients, nurses and 
rheumatologists in the Netherlands. Clin Exp Rheuma tol. 
38. Jones J, Hunter D. Qualitative research: consen sus methods for medical and health 
services research. BMJ 1995;311:376–380.  
39. Van der Zee KI, Sanderman R. Het meten van de a lgemene gezondheidstoestand met 
de RAND-36—een handleiding. Rijksuniversiteit Groni ngen: Noordelijk Centrum voor 
Gezondheidsvraagstukken; 1993.  
40. FACIT Functional Assessment of Chronic Illness Therapy. (2009). http://www.facit.org. 
Accessed 16 July 2009.  
41. Cluydts RJG. Gemoedstoestanden en slaap—een exp erimenteel onderzoek 
[dissertation]. Brussel: Vrije Universiteit Brussel ; 1979.  
42. MAPI INSTITUTE. (2009). http://www.mapi-institu te.com. Accessed 31 July 2009.  
43. Guillemin F, Bombardier C, Beaton D. Cross-cult ural adaptation of health-related 
quality of life measures: Literature review and pro posed guidelines. J Clin Epidemiol 
1993;46:1417–1432.   
135 44. Nikolaus S, Bode C, Taal E, van de Laar MAFJ. F our different patterns of fatigue in 
rheumatoid arthritis patients: Results of a Q-sort study. Rheumatology 2010;49:2191–
2199.  
45. Hjollund NH, Andersen JH, Bech P. Assessment of  fatigue in chronic disease: A 
bibliographic study of fatigue measurement scales. Health Qual Life Outcomes 2007;5:art. 
no. 12.  
46. Lwin CTT, Bishay M, Platts RG, Booth DA, Bowman  SJ. The assessment of fatigue in 
primary Sjögren´s Syndrome. Scand J Rheumatol 2003; 32:33–37.  
47. Neuberger GB. Measures of fatigue. Arthritis Rh eum 2003;49:S175–S183.  
48. Dittner AJ, Wessely SC, Brown RG. The assessmen t of fatigue—a practical guide for 
clinicians and researchers. J Psychosom Res 2004;56 :157–170.  
49. Ad hoc committee on systemic lupus erythematosu s response criteria for fatigue.  
Measurement of fatigue in systemic lupus erythemato sus: A systematic review. Arthritis 
Rheum 2007;57:1348–1357.  
50. Minton O, Stone P. A systematic review of the s cales used for the measurement of 
cancer-related fatigue (CRF). Ann Oncol 2009;20:17– 25.  
51. Whithead L. The measurement of fatigue in chron ic illness: A systematic review of 
unidimensional and multidimensional fatigue measure s. J Pain Symptom Manage 
2009;3:107–128.  
52. Patient-Reported Outcomes Measurement Informati on System (PROMIS). (2009). 
Preliminary item pools—fatigue (fatigue-experience and fatigue-impact). 
http://www.nihpromis.org/ Web%20Pages/Preliminary%2 0Item%20Banks%20[2006]aspx. 
Accessed 13 November 2009.  
53. SurveyMonkey [http://www.surveymonkey.com].  
54. Avouac J, Kowal-Bielecka O, Landewe R, Chwiesko  S, Miniati I, Czirjak L, et al.  
European league against rheumatism (EULAR) sclerode rma trial and research group 
(EUSTAR) recommendations for the treatment of syste mic sclerosis: Methods of 
elaboration and results of systematic literature re search. Ann Rheum Dis 2009;68:629–
634.  
55. Lai JS, Cook K, Stone A, Beaumont J, Cella D. C lassical test theory and item response 
theory/Rasch model to assess differences between pa tient-reported fatigue using 7-day 
and 4-week recall periods. J Clin Epidemiol 2009;62 :991–997.  
56. Statistics Netherlands. (2010). http://www.cbs. nl/nl-NL/menu/ themas/arbeid-sociale-
zekerheid/publicaties/artikelen/archief/ 2005/2005- 1825-wm.htm. Accessed 13 October 
2010.  
 
 136 APPENDIX:   
 
Figure 1  Item selection in the two Delphi rounds  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Round 1  
294 items 
 -directly  selected  
96 items 
-directly rejected 
9 items 
-selected after 
discussion 
61 items 
(1 item added  
because split  
into two items) 
-rejected after  
discussion 
8 items 
 
 -re -evaluation  
121 items 
-newly 
constructed 
2 items 
-split into two 
items 
1 item  157 items  
selected 
 
Round 2  
124 items -directly selected  
58 items 
-directly rejected 
1 item 
-selected after  
discussion  
30 items 
-rejected after  
discussion  
35 items  
finally 
selected 
245 items 
88 items       
selected  
137  
 
 
Chapter 7 
 
 
 
Which Dimensions of Fatigue Should be Measured  
in Patients with Rheumatoid Arthritis? 
A Delphi Study 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S. Nikolaus 
C. Bode 
E. Taal 
M.A.F.J. van de Laar 
 
Musculoskeletal Care. Published online 11 November 2011. doi:10.1002/msc.222 138 ABSTRACT 
 
Objective  Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) patients experience fati gue as a multidimensional 
symptom. The aim of the present study was to use he alth professionals and patients alike 
to identify which dimensions of fatigue should be m easured in RA.  
Methods  Twelve fatigue dimensions were constructed, based on items from traditional 
questionnaires and items generated from interviews.  Health professionals and patients 
evaluated these dimensions, related to an initial p ool of 294 items, in a Delphi procedure. 
Dimensions were selected if rated important by at l east 80% of the participants.  
Results  Ten rheumatologists, 20 nurses and 15 patients par ticipated. All fatigue 
dimensions were selected directly (severity, freque ncy, duration, changes in fatigue, 
perceived causes of fatigue, energy, sleep/rest, bo dy feeling, cognition/concentration, 
coping, negative emotions/mood and consequences). N o additional dimensions emerged 
from participants’ comments and suggestions.  
Conclusions  This study revealed 12 fatigue dimensions. This un derlines the 
multidimensionality of fatigue in RA and the need f or comprehensive measurement.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
139 INTRODUCTION 
 
Measuring fatigue in rheumatoid arthritis (RA) prov ides additional information on disease 
outcomes which does not overlap with other establis hed measures of RA, and is essential 
for understanding the patient’s perspective. 1 Several uni- and multidimensional scales 
have been developed to assess fatigue in clinical p ractice and research. Whereas 
unidimensional questionnaires are usually brief and  provide a single score, 
multidimensional scales comprise a larger number of  items and provide more detailed 
information, giving insight into different profiles  and underlying mechanisms of fatigue. 2  
Fatigue measures with single-item scales, such as v isual analogue scales (VAS) or 
numerical rating scales (NRS), might have some valu e, 1 but do not correspond with the 
multidimensional character of fatigue as reported b y patients. Qualitative studies have 
shown that patients experience fatigue as a multidi mensional, annoying symptom with 
far-reaching consequences. 3-6 In line with patients’ experiences, it is expected  that 
measurement must also be multidimensional, although  it is not yet clear which 
dimensions should be assessed.  
Of the four multi-item fatigue questionnaires for w hich there is reasonable evidence for 
validity in RA, 7 only the Multidimensional Assessment of Fatigue sc ale (MAF) 8 comprises 
several dimensions: severity, distress, timing and interference. The Functional Assessment 
of Chronic Illness Therapy Fatigue Scale (FACIT-F) 9 provides separate scores for the 
experience of fatigue as a symptom and the impact o f fatigue on daily functioning, 
although it is usually applied unidimensionally. Th e Short Form 36 (SF-36) subscale 
vitality 10  and the Profile of Mood States (POMS) subscale fat igue/ inertia 11  have only one 
dimension. Nicklin et al. 12   demonstrated that none of these four scales cover s patient-
reported concepts of fatigue comprehensively: frequ ency, duration, energy, sleep, 
cognition, coping, emotion, impact, social life, pl anning, relationships and quality of life. 4,12  
All of these dimensions were also relevant in our s tudy on fatigue experiences. 13  Recently, 
the Bristol RA Fatigue Multi-Dimensional Questionna ire (BRAF-MDQ) 14 was developed 
from the patient’s perspective and evaluated in a B ritish RA population. With its four 
dimensions (physical, living, cognition, emotion), a score for each dimension can be 
calculated. Its construction and evaluation focused  on patients scoring 5 or higher, and 7 
or higher on a VAS, reflecting severe fatigue. 4,14    
There is still no measurement instrument available that fully embraces the diversity of the 
experience of fatigue in RA with its several dimens ions. Developing a more extensive and 
informative instrument in traditional format would imply a higher burden for patients, as 
they would have to fill in more items, requiring mo re time and energy. 15  A solution lies in 
computer-adaptive testing (CAT), which provides the  possibility of measuring fatigue 140 comprehensively with relatively few items selected from an item bank. 16  To explore and 
select the relevant dimensions for the development of a multidimensional CAT for fatigue 
in RA, we conducted a Delphi study, to allow patien ts, rheumatologists and nurses to 
evaluate current dimensions of fatigue.  
 
 
PATIENTS AND METHODS 
 
Delphi process  
By using the Delphi process, 17  opinions about a certain topic can be collected vi a a 
questionnaire, which is sent by (electronic) mail t o a panel of potential participants, who 
then answer it individually. A Delphi study consist s of at least two rounds and aims to 
reach consensus among the participants.  
 
Preparation of the dimensions  
For the development of a multidimensional CAT for f atigue in RA, a comprehensive pool of 
dimensions of the fatigue experience in RA is neede d. We started by collating dimensions 
of the validated Dutch versions of the multi-item q uestionnaires with reasonable evidence 
for validity in RA: 7 RAND SF-36, 18  FACIT-F, 19  POMS 20  and MAF. 21  The dimensions of the 
BRAF-MDQ were also considered. All dimensions, with  the items reflecting each 
dimension, were sorted into a table (e.g. frequency , duration, severity, consequences, 
etc.) which was subsequently supplemented with addi tional dimensions and items 
formulated in the context of our previous Q-sort st udy 13  and based on interview material 
on the experience of fatigue in patients with RA. 5 To check for possibly missing aspects, 
we also looked at fatigue questionnaires which have  not been validated in RA, but no 
additional dimensions of fatigue emerged from this search. This procedure resulted in a 
table with 12 fatigue dimensions (severity, frequen cy, duration, changes in fatigue, 
perceived causes of fatigue, energy, sleep/rest, bo dy feeling, cognition/concentration, 
coping, negative emotions/ mood and consequences) a nd their associated items. The 
dimension with the largest number of items was ‘con sequences’, capturing general 
consequences and those regarding work and daily tas ks, household tasks, social life, self-
care, physical activity, leisure time and planning.  The preparation of the item pool is 
described in detail elsewhere. 22   
 
Participants and data collection  
Experts (40 rheumatologists, 40 nurses and 31 patie nts) were informed about the study 
and asked to participate by email, with a link to a n online questionnaire. Email addresses  
141 of patients were collated from the database of Pati ent Research Partners of the Arthritis 
Centre Twente, and those of rheumatologists and nur ses from the member lists of Dutch 
professional associations in Rheumatology (NVR, Dut ch Association for Rheumatology) 
and the DREAM registry (Dutch Rheumatoid Arthritis Monitoring, a collaboration between 
hospitals in the Netherlands to improve the quality  of care for patients with RA). Brief 
descriptions of the dimensions, with corresponding items, were provided. Participants 
were asked to indicate the importance of each dimen sion for the measurement of fatigue 
in RA (four-point Likert scale: very important, rat her important, less important, not at all 
important). Moreover, they had the possibility of a dding comments and suggestions in the 
blank fields available for each dimension, to under pin their evaluation or even add new 
dimensions.  
 
Analysis: Criteria for selection of dimensions  
A dimension of fatigue was selected for inclusion i n the CAT if 80% or more of the 
participants rated it as important (response option s ‘very important’ and ‘rather 
important’). A dimension which had been rated as im portant by 50% or less of participants 
was excluded. Dimensions rated as important by 50–8 0% of the experts were first 
discussed by the authors and then adapted according  to participants’ comments and 
suggestions, and re-evaluated if necessary. If the same comment was raised by at least 
two participants, it led to an adaptation of the di mension. The dimensions of fatigue 
included in the Delphi are shown in Table 1.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 142 Table 1  Overview of fatigue dimensions  
Dimension   Meaning of the dimension  Sample item  
Severity   Intensity of fatigue   Please circle the  number that shows your average level   
     of fatigue during the past 7 days. 
 
Frequency      Occurrence of fatigue   Did you feel  tired?  
 
Duration   Presence of fatigue over time  How long,  on average, has each episode of fatigue  
    lasted during the last 7 days? 
        
Changes in fatigue Variability and   To what degree  has your fatigue changed during the   
 unpredictability of fatigue past week? 
 
Perceived causes of  Circumstances that, according  Exercise brings on my fatigue.               
fatigue  to patients, influence their 
  fatigue 
        
Energy   Amount of energy, for  Did you have a lot of energy?              
  example to undertake an  
  activity 
 
Sleep/rest   Patients´ need for sleep or rest I nee d to sleep during the day.  
 
Body feeling  Feeling/manifestation of  I feel rela xed.    
  fatigue in the body  
 
Cognition/  Impact of fatigue on the ability Have y ou forgotten things because of fatigue? 
concentration to concentrate, or on tasks      
  that require thinking  
 
Coping   Ways of dealing with fatigue, I found it d ifficult to accept the fatigue.   
  for example used strategies,      
  or thoughts about fatigue 
 
Negative emotions/  Negative emotions or mood  I am  frustrated by being too tired to do the   
moode  caused by fatigue  things I want to do.  
 
Consequences  Impact of fatigue on daily life  I ha ve trouble finishing things because I am tired. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
143 RESULTS 
 
In the first round, 15 patients, 10 rheumatologists  and 20 nurses, working at 21 hospitals 
spread across the Netherlands, returned the complet ed questionnaire (n = 45).  
In the second round, 80% of the respondents from th e first round (15 nurses, 13 patients 
and eight rheumatologists) participated (n = 36). I n both rounds, our expert panel clearly 
consisted of more women than men (2:1), and the mea n age was 51.4 (standard deviation 
[SD] = 11.4) in the first round and 52.4 (SD = 10.5 ) in the second.  
In round 1, all 12 dimensions were evaluated as imp ortant by more than 80% of the 
participants, meaning that they could be selected f or the development of the CAT. The 
dimensions were regarded as important by at least 7 0% of each expert group 
(rheumatologists, nurses, patients), as displayed i n Table 2. Therefore, it was not 
necessary to ask about the dimensions again in roun d 2. As it is the principle of a Delphi 
study to give feedback about the results of the fir st round to participants, we presented 
the dimensions again in round 2, but only asked for  re-evaluation regarding the items.  
 
 
 
 
Table 2  Percentages of participants who evaluated a fatigu e dimension as important  
Dimension    global   patients   nurses       rheum atologists  
Severity    91%   93%   90%   90%  
Frequency      91%   93%   90%   90%  
Duration      93%   87%   95%   100%  
Changes in fatigue     89%   87%   90%   90%  
Perceived causes of fatigue   91%   87%   100%   80 %  
Energy    96%   93%   95%   100%  
Sleep/rest      93%   93%   100%   80%  
Body feeling   82%   93%   80%   70% 
Cognition/concentration  89%   87%   95%   80%  
Coping    96%   100%   100%   80%  
Negative emotions/mood  89%   74%   95%   100% 
Consequences   96%   87%   100%   100% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 144 DISCUSSION 
 
All dimensions were rated as important for the meas urement of fatigue in RA by at least 
80% of our expert panel (rheumatologists, nurses an d patients) and could be selected 
immediately in the first round. There was a large c onsensus between the three expert 
groups. The classification of the dimensions turned  out to be valid. This was checked 
because participants were not only asked how import ant they thought a dimension was, 
and we also wanted to assess whether each item matc hed a dimension, as described in 
our article on item selection for an item bank/CAT for fatigue in RA. 22  Furthermore, the 
experts were able to comment on each dimension and suggest further dimensions. Only 
six items had to be placed under another dimension,  and no additional dimensions were 
suggested. These results pointed to a good and comp rehensive selection and naming of 
the dimensions, which were also reflected adequatel y by the items in our item pool. 
Hence, the 12 content-valid dimensions will be used  for the further development of our 
multidimensional item bank/CAT. Such a comprehensiv e measurement becomes feasible 
owing to the advantage of CAT, which requires fewer  items than in a fixed-length 
questionnaire. 16  
In the next study, factor analyses will further val idate the proposed dimensions. The 
present study showed the importance of including ev ery significant aspect of fatigue in 
the development of the CAT. However, naming dimensi ons and classifying items without 
statistical analyses remains disputable. In the eva luation study of the BRAF-MDQ, the 12 
patient-reported categories ended up in four dimens ions after factor analysis. 14  Pollard et 
al. 23 conducted a factor analysis of different fatigue in struments and found five dominant 
factors: psychological factors anxiety/depression, distress/cognition, fatigue severity, 
physical interference and social interference. They  concluded that currently available 
fatigue questionnaires measure different aspects of  fatigue and highlighted the need for a 
multidimensional tool comprising questions that can  appropriately measure the impact of 
fatigue and its possible drivers, besides its overa ll severity. 23  Our validated fatigue 
dimensions are comprehensive and adequate for the d evelopment of such a 
multidimensional instrument in the form of a CAT.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
145 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
 
We would like to thank the following participants i n this study: patients from the forum of 
patient research partners of the Arthritis Centre T wente and rheumatologists and nurses 
from: Universitair Medisch Centrum Groningen, Medis ch Centrum Leeuwarden, 
Ziekenhuisgroep Twente, Zorg Groep Twente, Medisch Spectrum Twente, St. 
Maartenskliniek Nijmegen, TweeSteden Ziekenhuis Loc atie Tilburg, Universitair Medisch 
Centrum Utrecht, Rijnstate Ziekenhuis Arnhem, Meand er Medisch Centrum Amersfoort, 
Ziekenhuis Gelderse Vallei Ede, Medisch Centrum Haa glanden s-Gravenhage, Tweesteden 
Ziekenhuis Tilburg, Evean Thuiszorg Purmerend, Stre ekziekenhuis Midden Twente 
Hengelo, Isala Klinieken Zwolle, Albert Schweitzer Ziekenhuis Dordrecht, Spaarne 
Ziekenhuis Hoofddorp, Scheperziekenhuis Emmen, Thui szorg West-Brabant Roosendal and 
Omring Thuiszorg Hoorn.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 146 REFERENCES  
 
1. Minnock P, Kirwan J, Bresnihan B. Fatigue is a r eliable, sensitive and unique outcome 
measure in rheumatoid arthritis. Rheumatology 2009; 48:1533–6.  
2. Dittner AJ, Wessely SC, Brown RG. The assessment  of fatigue – A practical guide for 
clinicians and researchers. J Psychosom Res 2004;56 :157–70. 
3. Belza Tack B. Fatigue in rheumatoid arthritis. C onditions, strategies, and consequences. 
Arthritis Care Res 1990;3:65–70.  
4. Hewlett S, Cockshott Z, Byron M, Kitchen K, Tipl er S, Pope D, Hehir M. Patients’ 
perceptions of fatigue in rheumatoid arthritis: Ove rwhelming, uncontrollable, ignored. 
Arthritis Care Res 2005;53:697–702.  
5. Nikolaus S, Bode C, Taal E, van de Laar MAFJ. Ne w insights into the experience of fatigue 
among patients with rheumatoid arthritis: A qualita tive study. Ann Rheum Dis 
2010;69:895–7.  
6. Repping-Wuts H, Uitterhoeve R, van Riel P, van A chterberg T. Fatigue as experienced by 
patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA): A qualitat ive study. Int J Nurs Stud 2008;45:995–
1002.  
7. Hewlett S, Hehir M, Kirwan JR. Measuring fatigue  in rheumatoid arthritis: A systematic 
review of scales in use. Arthritis Rheum 2007;57:42 9–39.  
8. Belza Tack B. Dimensions and correlates of fatig ue in older adults with rheumatoid 
arthritis. Dissertation. University of California; 1991.  
9. Cella D, Lai JS, Stone A. Self-reported fatigue:  one dimension or more? Lessons from the 
Functional Assessment of Chronic Illness Therapy Fa tigue (FACIT-F) questionnaire. Support 
Care Cancer 2011;19:1441–50.  
10. Ware JE Jr, Sherbourne CD. The MOS 36-Item Shor t-Form Health Survey (SF-36). I. 
Conceptual framework and item selection. Med Care 1 992;30:473–83.  
11. McNair D, Lorr M, Droppelman L. Profile of Mood  States Manual. New York, NY: Multi-
health Systems Inc; 1992.  
12. Nicklin J, Cramp F, Kirwan J, Urban M, Hewlett S. Collaboration with patients in the 
design of patient reported outcome measures: Captur ing the experience of fatigue in 
rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Care Res 2010;62:15 52–8.  
13. Nikolaus S, Bode C, Taal E, van de Laar MAFJ. F our different patterns of fatigue in 
rheumatoid arthritis patients: Results of a Q-sort study. Rheumatology 2010;49:2191–9.  
14. Nicklin J, Cramp F, Kirwan J, Greenwood R, Urba n M, Hewlett S. Measuring fatigue in 
rheumatoid arthritis: A cross-sectional study to ev aluate the Bristol Rheumatoid Arthritis 
Fatigue Multi-Dimensional questionnaire, visual ana logue scales, and numerical rating 
scales. Arthritis Care Res 2010;62:1559–68.   
147 15. Whitehead L. The measurement of fatigue in chro nic illness: A systematic review of 
unidimensional and multidimensional fatigue measure s. J Pain Symptom Manage 
2009;37:107–22.  
16. Rose M, Bezjak A. Logistics of collecting patie ntreported outcomes (PROs) in clinical 
practice: An overview and practical examples. Qual Life Res 2009;18:125–36.  
17. Jones J, Hunter D. Qualitative research: Consen sus methods for medical and health 
services research. BMJ 1995;311:376–80. 
18. van der Zee KI, Sanderman R. Het meten van de a lgemene gezondheidstoestand met 
de RAND-36 – een handleiding. Groningen in the Neth erlands: Noordelijk Centrum voor 
Gezondheidsvraagstukken, Rijksuniversiteit Groninge n; 1993.  
19. FACIT :Functional Assessment of Chronic Illness  Therapy. Available at 
http://www.facit.org [Accessed 16 July 2009].  
20. Cluydts RJG. Gemoedstoestanden en slaap – een e xperimenteel onderzoek. 
Dissertation. Vrije Universiteit Brussel; 1979.  
21. MAPI Institute. Available at http://www.mapi-in stitute. com [Accessed 31 July 2009].  
22. Nikolaus S, Bode C, Taal E, van de Laar MAFJ. S election of items for a computer 
adaptive test to measure fatigue in patients with r heumatoid arthritis – A Delphi 
approach. Qual Life Res 2011 [Epub ahead of print],  DOI: 10.1007/s11136-011-9982-8  
23. Pollard LC, Scott DL, Donaldson N, Choy EH. Fat igue in rheumatoid arthritis, what are 
we measuring? A factor analysis of fatigue instrume nts. Rheumatology 2009;48:i135.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 148  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
149  
 
 
Chapter 8 
 
 
 
Experts’ evaluations of fatigue questionnaires used  in 
rheumatoid arthritis - A Delphi study among patient s, nurses 
and rheumatologists in the Netherlands 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S. Nikolaus 
C. Bode 
E. Taal 
M.A.F.J. van de Laar 
 
Clin Exp Rheumatol (in press) 150 ABSTRACT 
 
Objective Evaluating fatigue items from traditional questionn aires and a new scale (BRAF-
MDQ) by experts in rheumatoid arthritis (RA). This evaluation was part of a study to select 
fatigue items to develop an item bank for a Dutch c omputer-adaptive test (CAT) for RA. 
Experts’ opinions were incorporated since they are essential for content validity of 
measurement instruments. 
Methods  The 60 items of the SF-36 subscale vitality, FACIT -F, POMS subscale 
fatigue/inertia, MAF and the recently developed BRA F-MDQ were evaluated by 
rheumatologists, nurses and RA patients in a Delphi  procedure. Items were selected for 
development of the item bank/CAT if rated as adequa te by at least 80% of the participants 
(when 50% or less they were excluded). On the basis  of participants’ comments, remaining 
items were re-worded and re-evaluated in the follow ing round. The procedure stopped 
when all items were selected or rejected. 
Results Ten rheumatologists, 20 nurses and 15 RA patients p articipated. After the first 
round, 40% of the traditional items and 60% of the BRAF-MDQ items were directly 
selected and 3 items of the traditional questionnai res and 1 item of the BRAF-MDQ were 
directly excluded. Remaining items were re-worded, eight of which were presented for re-
evaluation in the second round. Finally, 90% of the  items from the traditional 
questionnaires and 95% of the items from the new BR AF-MDQ were included in our item 
pool.  
Conclusion  Fifty-five of the 60 items (92%) from fatigue ques tionnaires proved to have 
good content validity and were feasible for use in the Netherlands, some after adaptation.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
151 Measuring fatigue in rheumatoid arthritis (RA) prov ides information on a prominent 
symptom of RA, and is essential for the understandi ng of the patients´ perspective. 1 
Patients experience fatigue as a multidimensional, annoying symptom with far-reaching 
consequences. 2-5 
Only four multi-item fatigue questionnaires have sh own reasonable evidence for validity 
in RA 6: Short Form 36 subscale vitality (SF-36), 7 Functional Assessment of Chronic Illness 
Therapy Fatigue Scale (FACIT-F), 8 Profile of Mood States subscale fatigue/inertia (P OMS), 9 
and the Multidimensional Assessment of Fatigue scal e (MAF). 10  However, none of these 
scales met all criteria for validity nor was the pe rspective of patients included in their 
development. 6 The Bristol RA Fatigue Multi-Dimensional Questionn aire (BRAF-MDQ) 11  was 
recently constructed and evaluated in a British RA population. Its development 
encompasses the patients’ perspective with intervie ws, focus groups and cognitive testing. 
The development focuses on patients scoring 7 or hi gher on a VAS fatigue and the 
evaluation of the questionnaire on patients scoring  5 or higher. 2,11   
There is still no measurement instrument that incor porates the patients’ perspective and 
that is validated in the Netherlands. In this study , the BRAF-MDQ items will be tested in a 
Dutch population for the first time. However, we do  not intend to develop another fatigue 
questionnaire; instead we will use innovative techn ology to measure fatigue in RA more 
precisely with fewer items. Computer-adaptive testi ng (CAT) allows comprehensively 
measuring fatigue with relatively few items. 12  Items are respectively selected and based 
on the patient’s previous answer, thus enabling pre cise measurement at individual level 
with few items. The working mechanism of a CAT can be illustrated by the following 
example: if a patient disagreed with the question “ Are you too tired to take exercise?”, 
this patient would not also get a question reflecti ng more severe fatigue as “Are you too 
tired to go for a short walk?”. For the development  of a CAT for fatigue in RA, adequate 
items have to be selected for inclusion in an item bank.   
Items of the aforementioned fatigue questionnaires 7-10  are available in Dutch. Though, the 
patients’ perspective was not part of their develop ment and they were not specifically 
designed for patients with RA. Therefore, it is of particular importance to check content 
validity. 
We conducted a Delphi study to allow patients, rheu matologists and nurses to evaluate 
fatigue items. It is essential to include the opini on of patients and professionals in the 
development of questionnaire items to ensure conten t validity. 13  Only patients can report 
on the subjective experience of fatigue, and clinic ians have the most experience with the 
outward manifestation of a symptom or condition. 13   
This paper focuses on the evaluation of existing fa tigue items: how do experts evaluate 
the items from traditional fatigue questionnaires ( SF-36 subscale vitality, FACIT-F, POMS 152 subscale fatigue/inertia, MAF)? Do the items of the  BRAF-MDQ meet the meaning of 
fatigue in the Netherlands? 
 
 
PATIENTS AND METHODS 
 
Delphi process 
With the Delphi process, 14  opinions about a certain topic can be collected by  a 
questionnaire, which is sent by (electronic) mail t o a panel of potential participants who 
then fill it out individually. In our case, they ra ted the fatigue items on their own. Contrary 
to group discussion, no attention has to be paid to  prevent that especially the more 
dominant participants express their opinion, so tha t the phenomenon of “group think” 
cannot obstruct the viewing of different opinions. A Delphi study consists of at least two 
rounds and aims to reach consensus among the partic ipants. After each Delphi round, 
systematic feedback on the results of the previous round are provided to the 
participants. 15  By doing so, the experts are informed about the op inions that are present 
in the group. The extent of agreement is determined  by statistical measures as no in 
person meetings are conducted.  
  
Preparation of the item pool 
In our aim to develop a CAT for fatigue in RA, we n eed a large and comprehensive item 
pool to cover all dimensions of the fatigue experie nce in RA. We included 40 items of the 
validated Dutch versions of the RAND SF-36 subscale  vitality, 16  FACIT-F, 17  POMS subscale 
fatigue/inertia, 18  and MAF, 19  henceforth referred to as traditional questionnair es. We also 
included all 20 items of the BRAF-MDQ, which we tra nslated from English into Dutch using 
the recommended cross-cultural translation procedur e. 20  Additional items developed from 
interview material were enclosed (not reported in t his paper, the entire process of the 
Delphi study is described elsewhere 21 ). 
 
Participants and data collection 
We contacted the experts (40 rheumatologists, 40 nu rses and 31 patients) by e-mail, 
informing them about the study and requesting their  participation. The e-mails contained 
a link to an online questionnaire in which we prese nted the fatigue items. The e-mail 
addresses of patients were collated from the databa se of Patient Research Partners of the 
Arthritis Centre Twente and those of rheumatologist s and nurses from the member list of 
a Dutch professional association in Rheumatology (N VR) and the DREAM registry. The 
participants were asked to indicate on a 4-point Li kert scale (very appropriate, rather  
153 appropriate, less appropriate, not at all appropria te) how appropriate they thought each 
item was. Participants also had the possibility to comment on the items and suggest 
improvements in the blank fields below each item. 
After each round, the data were analysed and summar ized. For the items which had to be 
re-evaluated in round 2, information about its eval uation in round 1 was provided by 
presenting the relevant item, a brief summary of th e comments given, and finally the re-
worded item. Items had to be evaluated in the same way as in round 1.  
 
Analysis and criteria for item selection 
In Delphi studies, different rules for defining suf ficient consensus are applied, 15  ranging 
from 55 - 80%. To establish the rule for our study,  we searched the literature for other 
Delphi studies in health research. Repeatedly, the criterion of 80% was used for selection 
of an item or topic, as for EULAR recommendations. 22  On the basis of these examples, we 
also applied the conservative criterion of 80% agre ement. Further properties of our rule 
were developed in discussion among the authors to m eet our special situation with 
different expert groups.  
An item was directly selected for inclusion in the CAT item pool if 80% or more of the 
participants rated it as appropriate (response opti ons ‘very appropriate’ and ‘rather 
appropriate’). Agreement by 50% or less of the part icipants led to the item’s rejection.  
Besides the global percentage, we also calculated t he percentages per expert group. If the 
mean percentage was sufficiently high (80%) or low (50%), but one group differed by more 
than 10% from the criterion (below 70% or above 60% ), the item was not directly selected 
or removed. They, and also those items rated as app ropriate by 50%-80% of the experts, 
were discussed by the authors and re-worded accordi ng to the participants’ comments 
and suggestions. If the same comment was raised by at least two participants, it led to an 
adaptation of the item. The re-worded items were ju dged again in round 2 by the panel. 
After round 2, comments were discussed among the re searchers and the final decision 
about in- or exclusion of the items was made. 
 
 
RESULTS 
 
In the first round, 15 patients, 10 rheumatologists  and 20 nurses, working at 21 hospitals 
spread over the Netherlands, returned the completed  questionnaire (N=45). In the second 
round, 80% of the participants of the first round ( 15 nurses, 13 patients and 8 
rheumatologists) participated (N=36). In both round s, our expert panel clearly consisted of 154 more women than men (2:1) and the mean age was 51.4  (SD=11.4) in the first round and 
52.4 (SD=10.5) in the second round. 
 
Evaluation of the items  
Round 1 
An immediate decision could be made on 18 of the 40  items of the traditional 
questionnaires (SF-36 subscale vitality, FACIT-F, P OMS subscale fatigue/inertia, MAF). 
Sixteen items (40%) were rated as appropriate by at  least 80% of the participants so that 
they were directly selected for the development of the CAT. Two items were rejected 
because they were rated as appropriate by 50% or le ss of the participants. Item 7 of the 
POMS “Over the past 7 days I felt bushed” was exclu ded.  Participants rated this item as 
too negative, dramatic, extreme or exaggerated. Mor eover they noted that the item might 
be confusing because it could also reflect physical  circumstances such as a loss of strength 
in the joints, or have a psychological component su ch as depressive feelings. The second 
excluded item was question 2 of the MAF “How severe  is the fatigue which you have been 
experiencing during the past week? 1=mild 2 3 4 5 6  7 8 9 10=severe”. In the official Dutch 
questionnaire, fatigue was translated as ‘ uitputting ’ which actually means ‘exhaustion’ 
and it was criticized that exhaustion is always ass umed to be present. Furthermore, 
participants said that it was not possible to measu re exhaustion with the used scale since 
you are either exhausted or not, i.e., that exhaust ion is always serious. 
Regarding the BRAF-MDQ, 12 out of the 20 items (60% ) were directly selected and 1 item 
(5%) was excluded. This was question 12 “Over the p ast 7 days, have you felt embarrassed 
because of fatigue?”, which participants found ambi guous and too difficult. 
The authors discussed the remaining items (>50% and  <80% experts agreed) of the five 
scales, whereby the participants’ comments and sugg estions were considered. Items that 
did not receive comments on their content but on th eir formulation or the response 
options, for example, were adjusted (phrase or word  replaced, deleted or added) and 
included in the item pool. This applied to 17 (42.5 %) items of the traditional 
questionnaires. A major concern was again the use o f the Dutch word for exhaustion in 
the MAF. Participants found this term inappropriate  and advised using another word that 
reflects the word ‘fatigue’ better. Accordingly, we  replaced the term 
‘uitputting /exhaustion’ with ‘ vermoeidheid /fatigue’ in all concerned MAF items and as 
respondents found the formulation of most MAF items  cumbersome, we shortened them. 
Furthermore, experts rated the response options of the FACIT-F as unclear, so we re-
worded these too. Table 1 shows examples of these a daptations. Item 5 of the POMS 
’Over the past 7 days I felt sluggish’ was excluded  after discussion, the reason being that 
respondents rated this item as unclear and no alter natives were found for reformulation.  
155 The authors selected 3 (15%) BRAF-MDQ items after m inor adaptations, such as the 
replacement or deletion of a word. 
Four items (10%) of the traditional questionnaires needed more extensive adaptations 
(e.g., inclusion of examples, reformulation of an e ntire item) and were presented for re-
evaluation in round 2. Four BRAF-MDQ items (20%) we re presented for re-evaluation 
either because examples had to be inserted or becau se only criticism but no suggestion 
for improvement had been given. 
 
 
Table 1 Examples for adaptations and selection of items by t he authors 
Item in round 1  Comments    Adapted and selected i tem 
MAF item 5   
In the past week, to what  Formulate item and respo nse  During the past 7 days, how  
degree has fatigue   options easier, replace the Du tch  did your fatigue prevent you   
interfered with your ability  word for exhaustion ( uitputting )    from cooking? 
to cook? 1 = not at all 2 3 4  with a word that ref ers to fatigue  1=not at all, 2=a little, 
5 6 7 8 9 10 = a great deal  better ( vermoeidheid ) because  3=rather, 4= to a great extent,   
   exhaustion is too extreme, it is    5=does not ap ply to me 
   possible that cooking is not    
   applicable to a patient.     
          
FACIT-F item 4 
During the last 7 days, I  The response options are  unclear  During the past 7 days, I  
felt tired.    (translated in Dutch as 0=helemaal  felt tired. 
0=not at all, 1=a little bit, niet, 1=een beetje, 2=enigzins , 3=in  1=not at all, 2=a little, 
2=somewhat, 3=quite a bit, vrij hoge mate, 4= in zeer hoge   3=rather, 4=to a great  
4=very much  mate ); the formulation of option  extent (Dutch: 1=helemaal   
   3 and 4 is too formal, and the  niet, 2=een beetje, 3=nogal ,   
   difference between option 1 and 2 4=in  sterke mate ) 
   is not clear. 
 
 
Round 2  
Table II shows examples of items included in round 2. After the second round, 3 adapted 
items of the traditional questionnaires were evalua ted as adequate by more than 80% of 
the participants and could immediately be selected.  Participants had no complaints about 
the general adaptations made to these items (e.g., different word in MAF, response 
options FACIT-F). Of the 4 BRAF-MDQ items included in round 2, two were rated as 
adequate by at least 80% of the participants and im mediately selected. 
Based on the comments given, the authors decided to  exclude one item of the traditional 
questionnaires, namely question 1 of the POMS (see table 2). This item was adjusted 156 according to the comments; the Dutch translation fo r ‘worn out’ ( doodop ) was replaced 
with a synonym ( bekaf ) and the response options were adapted. Despite th is, many 
participants still found this item unclear and too negative. Two BRAF-MDQ items were 
included with adapted response options after discus sion between the authors.  
 
 
Table 2 Examples of adapted items presented for re-evaluatio n in round 2. 
Item origin   Original item   Adapted item 
Finally selected 
FACIT-F item 2  During the last 7 days I felt weak all over.  During the past 7 days, my  
   0=not at all, 1=a little bit, 2=somewhat,. fatig ue made me feel weak. 
3=quite a bit, 4=very much 1=not at all, 2=a little , 3=rather, 
4=to a great extent 
 
MAF item 3   In the past week to what degree has Was your fatigu e during the past 
fatigue caused you distress?   7 days aggravating?  
1-10 / 1 = no distress, 10 = a great  deal 1=not at  all, 2=a little,  
of distress    3=rather, 4=to a great extent 
 
MAF item 14   In the past week, to what degree has  During the past 7 days, how did  
fatigue interfered with your ability  your fatigue prevent you from 
to exercise, other than walking?    moving (e.g. wal ing, cycling,  
1 = not at all 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 = a  playing spor ts)? 1=not at all, 
great deal    2=a little, 3=rather, 4=to a great  
    extent 
 
BRAF-MDQ    Have you lacked mental energy    Have you lacked me ntal energy 
item 12   because of fatigue? 1=not at all,   (e.g.  energy to think properly 
2=a little, 3= quite a bit, 4=very much  about sth. , to make plans, to be  
     creative) because of fatigue? 
1=not at all, 2=a little, 3=quite a 
bit, 4=very much  
 
BRAF-MDQ    Have you felt down or depressed  Have you felt down  or dejected 
item 20   because of fatigue? 1=not at all, 2=a bec ause of fatigue? 1=not at all, 
little, 3=quite a bit, 4=very much  2=a little, 3=q uite a bit, 4=very  
       much 
 
Finally excluded 
POMS item 1   Over the past 7 days I felt worn out Over the past 7 days I felt worn  
(Dutch translation: doodo p).  out (Dutch: bekaf ). 1=never,  
1=not at all, 2=a little, 3=moderate, 2=rarely, 3=s ometimes,    
4=quite a bit, 5=extremely     4=usually,  5=always 
  
157 Finally, 36 items (90%) from the traditional questi onnaires and 19 items (95%) from the 
BRAF-MDQ were included in our item pool. Table 3 (a s provided in the appendix at the 
end of this article) shows the percentage of items per scale in each selection step. 
 
 
DISCUSSION 
 
This Delphi study provided insights into the perspe ctive of patients and professionals on 
fatigue items of four traditional scales (SF-36 sub scale vitality, FACIT-F, POMS subscale 
fatigue/inertia and MAF) and a new questionnaire (B RAF-MDQ) developed in the UK.  
It appeared that only 40% of the items from traditi onal questionnaires were clear and 
adequate in their original style for at least 80% o f the participants. This finding underlines 
the relevance of the perspective of professionals a nd patients in the development of 
measurement instruments for fatigue in RA. However,  most of the items could be selected 
after adaptations, with only 4 of the 40 items bein g excluded. Remarkably, three of these 
items originated from the POMS. One item was rated as too extreme and confusing, 
because it could also be related to circumstances o ther than fatigue; the other items were 
also rated as too extreme or as unclear. The fourth  excluded item came from the MAF and 
had to be directly excluded due to insufficient per centages of ratings as adequate. The 
item would probably have received more positive eva luations, though, with the word 
‘vermoeidheid ’ that we used to replace ‘ uitputtin g’ in all of the selected MAF items. The 
reaction of our experts to the term ‘ uitputting ’ suggests that the Dutch version of the MAF 
might sooner measure exhaustion than fatigue. This finding points to the need to carefully 
check and re-check cross-cultural translations to e nsure that the intended measurement 
aim is met. However, our results cannot be generali zed to the items in the original English 
questionnaire since it was the official Dutch trans lations that were evaluated in this study. 
An evaluation of the original English items by rheu matologists, nurses and patients could 
provide more insight. 
The BRAF-MDQ turned out to suit the fatigue experie nce in a Dutch population well. This 
may be attributed to its advantage of including the  patients’ perspective in the 
development process. Only one item had to be exclud ed and was about feeling 
embarrassed. It is difficult to fully explain why i t received low percentages of agreement 
since only few comments were given. A possible expl anation might be that British patients 
might feel more embarrassed about fatigue than Dutc h patients since they live in a so-
called ‘stiff upper lip’, masculine culture in whic h it is not so common to show 
weakness. 2,23  In contrast, the Netherlands is considered a more feminine and openly 
nurturing culture. 23  158 This study was limited to the Netherlands, so we ar e not able to draw conclusions about 
the quality of the examined items in other countrie s. Furthermore, there were no 
generally accepted criteria we could apply for our in- and exclusion of items. However, we 
carefully deliberated our criteria and chose for th e conservative criterion of 80% 
agreement as inclusion criterion that was frequentl y used in other Delphi studies. 22  A 
considerable amount of the criticism on the fatigue  items was related to translation 
difficulties rather than to their content. To concl ude, 90% of the traditional questionnaire 
items and 95% of the BRAF-MDQ items showed good con tent validity and feasibility 
(partly in an adapted version) for use in the Nethe rlands and will be included in our item 
pool for the development of a CAT for fatigue in RA . This item pool contains further items 
that were validated by our expert panel, for exampl e items based on interview material. 21  
We assume that our item pool is comprehensive and a dequate for the measurement of 
fatigue in RA. In a next step, the items have to be  scaled according to item response 
theory (IRT). With IRT, item parameters as the diff iculty level can be assessed for each 
item independently. 24  This information is required to ideally match the items to the 
patient’s individual level and construct the CAT fo r fatigue in RA.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
159 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
 
We would like to thank the following participants i n this study: patients from the forum of 
Patient Research Partners of the Arthritis Centre T wente and rheumatologists and nurses 
from Universitair Medisch Centrum Groningen, Medisc h Centrum Leeuwarden, 
Ziekenhuisgroep Twente, Zorg Groep Twente, Medisch Spectrum Twente, St. 
Maartenskliniek Nijmegen, TweeSteden Ziekenhuis Loc atie Tilburg, Universitair Medisch 
Centrum Utrecht, Rijnstate Ziekenhuis Arnhem, Meand er Medisch Centrum Amersfoort, 
Ziekenhuis Gelderse Vallei Ede, Medisch Centrum Haa glanden s-Gravenhage, Tweesteden 
Ziekenhuis Tilburg, Evean Thuiszorg Purmerend, Stre ekziekenhuis Midden Twente 
Hengelo, Isala Klinieken Zwolle, Albert Schweitzer Ziekenhuis Dordrecht, Spaarne 
Ziekenhuis Hoofddorp, Scheperziekenhuis Emmen, Thui szorg West-Brabant Roosendal, 
Omring Thuiszorg Hoorn. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 160 REFERENCES 
 
1. Minnock P, Kirwan J, Bresnihan B. Fatigue is a r eliable, sensitive and unique outcome 
measure in rheumatoid arthritis. Rheumatology 2009; 48:1533-1536. 
2. Hewlett S, Cockshott Z, Byron M, Kitchen K, Tipl er S, Pope D, et al. Patients' perceptions 
of fatigue in rheumatoid arthritis: overwhelming, u ncontrollable, ignored. Arthritis Care 
Res 2005;53:697-702. 
3. Nikolaus S, Bode C, Taal E, van de Laar MAFJ. Fo ur different patterns of fatigue in 
rheumatoid arthritis patients: results of a Q-sort study. Rheumatology 2010;49:2191-2199. 
4. Van Oers ML, Bossema ER, Thoolen BJ, Hartkamp A,  Dekkers JC, Godaert GL, et al. 
Variability of fatigue during the day in patients w ith primary Sjögren's syndrome, systemic 
lupus erythematosus, and rheumatoid arthritis. Clin  Exp Rheumatol 2010;28:715-21.  
5. Strand V, Khanna D. The impact of rheumatoid art hritis and treatment on patients' lives. 
Clin Exp Rheumatol 2010;28:S32-40.  
6. Hewlett S, Hehir M, Kirwan JR. Measuring fatigue  in rheumatoid arthritis: a systematic 
review of scales in use. Arthritis Rheum 2007;57:42 9-439. 
7. Ware JE Jr, Sherbourne CD. The MOS 36-Item Short -Form Health Survey (SF-36). I. 
Conceptual framework and item selection. Med Care 1 992;30:473-483. 
8. Cella D, Yount S, Sorensen M, Chartash E, Sengup ta N, Grober J. Validation of the 
Functional Assessment of Chronic Illness Therapy Fa tigue Scale relative to other 
instrumentation in patients with rheumatoid arthrit is. J Rheumatol 2005;32:811-819.  
9. McNair D, Lorr M, Droppelman L. Profile of Mood States Manual. New York: Multi-
health Systems Inc; 1992. 
10. Belza Tack B. Dimensions and correlates of fati gue in older adults with rheumatoid 
arthritis [dissertation]. San Francisco: University  of California; 1991.  
11. Nicklin J, Cramp F, Kirwan J, Greenwood R, Urba n M, Hewlett S. Measuring fatigue in 
rheumatoid arthritis: A cross-sectional study to ev aluate the Bristol Rheumatoid Arthritis 
Fatigue Multi-Dimensional questionnaire, visual ana logue scales, and numerical rating 
scales. Arthritis Care Res 2010;62:1559-1568. 
12. Rose M, Bezjak A. Logistics of collecting patie nt-reported outcomes (PROs) in clinical 
practice: an overview and practical examples. Qual Life Res 2009;18:125-136. 
13. Streiner DL, Norman GR, eds. Health measurement  scales – a practical guide to their 
development and use. New York: Oxford University Pr ess; 2003. 
14. Jones J, Hunter D. Qualitative research: consen sus methods for medical and health 
services research. BMJ 1995;311:376-380. 
15. Powell, C. (2003). The Delphi technique: myths and realities. Journal of Advanced 
Nursing, 41, 376-382.  
161 16. Van der Zee KI, Sanderman, R. Het meten van de algemene gezondheidstoestand met 
de RAND-36 – een handleiding. Noordelijk Centrum vo or Gezondheidsvraagstukken, 
Rijksuniversiteit Groningen. 1993. 
17. FACIT Functional Assessment of Chronic Illness Therapy. Retrieved July 16, 2009, from 
www.facit.org   
18. Cluydts, RJG. Gemoedstoestanden en slaap – een experimenteel onderzoek 
[dissertation]. Brussel: Vrije Universiteit Brussel ; 1979. 
19. MAPI INSTITUTE. Retrieved July 31, 2009, from w ww.mapi-institute.com   
20. Guillemin F, Bombardier C, Beaton D. Cross-cult ural adaptation of health-related 
quality of life measures: literature review and pro posed guidelines. J Clin Epidemiol 
1993;46:1417-1432. 
21. Nikolaus S, Bode C, Taal E, van de Laar MAFJ. S election of items for a computer-
adaptive test to measure fatigue in patients with r heumatoid arthritis – A Delphi 
approach. Qual Life Res. Published online 31 July 2 011. doi: 10.1007/s11136-011-9982-8. 
22. Avouac J, Kowal-Bielecka O, Landewe R, Chwiesko  S, Miniati I, Czirjak L, et al.  
European League Against Rheumatism (EULAR) Sclerode rma Trial and Research group 
(EUSTAR) recommendations for the treatment of syste mic sclerosis: methods of 
elaboration and results of systematic literature re search. Ann Rheum Dis 2009;68:629-
634. 
23. Geert Hofstede TM  Cultural Dimensions. Retrieved July 22, 2010, from  www.geert-
hofstede.com/hofstede_dimensions.php?culture1=62&cu lture2=94  
24. Hambleton RK, Swaminathan H, Rogers HJ. Fundame ntals of Item Response Theory. 
Sage Publications; 1991. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 162 APPENDIX: Table 3  Selection of fatigue items from the four tradition al scales and the BRAF-MDQ 
 
Scale/   RAND-36 FACIT-F POMS MAF BRAF-MDQ  Summary  
Evaluation   4 items 13 items 7 items 16 items 20 i tems  60 items 
Round 1:  
Directly selected  3 (75%) 9 (69.2%) 1 (14.3%) 3 (1 8.8%) 12 (60%)  28 (46.6%) 
Selected after adaptation 1 (25%) 3 (23.1%) 3 (42.9 %) 10 (62.5%) 3 (15%)  20 (33.3%)  
Directly rejected    1 (14.3%) 1 (6.25%) 1 (5%)  3 (5%) 
Rejected after discussion   1 (14.3%)    1 (1.7%) 
Adapted and selected for  0 1 1 2 4  8 
re-evaluation in round 2 
Round 2:  
Directly selected   1 (7.7%)  2 (12.5%)  2 (10%)  5  (8.3%) 
Selected after discussion     2 (10%)  2 (3.3%) 
Directly rejected 
Rejected after discussion   1 (14.3%)    1 (1.7%) 
Finally excluded items  0  0                 3   1  1   5  (8%)            
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
163  
 
 
Chapter 9  
 
 
 
Calibration of a multidimensional item bank to meas ure fatigue 
in rheumatoid arthritis patients 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S. Nikolaus 
C. Bode 
E. Taal 
A. Oostveen 
C.A.W. Glas 
M.A.F.J. van de Laar 
 
In preparation for submission 164 ABSTRACT 
 
Objective Goal of this study was the calibration of an item p ool to measure fatigue in 
rheumatoid arthritis (RA). It was based on the pati ents´ perspective captured by an 
interview study, and examined for face and content validity by a previous Delphi study 
with patients and professionals. The fit of the ite ms with the underlying dimensions was 
assessed with item response theory (IRT) and the di mensionality structure of the item 
pool was examined by factor analysis and multidimen sional IRT. 
Methods  Participants were 551 patients with RA from three hospitals in the Netherlands. 
Obviously, it was not feasible to let each patient score all 245 items of our item pool, so 
we used an item administration design to construct seven different questionnaire 
versions. Each patient completed one version of the  questionnaire, maximally containing 
126 items. IRT analysis using the generalized parti al credit model (GPCM) was conducted 
for each dimension of fatigue. Poorly fitting items  were removed. Consecutively, 
exploratory and confirmatory factor analysis was pe rformed on the remaining items and a 
multidimensional IRT model was fitted. 
Results  In the IRT analysis, 49 items showed insufficient item characteristics. Items with a 
discriminative ability <0.60 and/or model misfit ef fect sizes >0.10 were removed. 
Exploratory and confirmatory factor analysis on the  196 remaining items revealed three 
dimensions of fatigue named: severity, impact and v ariability of fatigue. The dimensions 
were further confirmed in multidimensional IRT mode l analysis. 
Conclusion  This study provided an initially calibrated multid imensional item bank and has 
shown which dimensions and items that came forward from previous studies are 
important for the development of a multidimensional  computerized adaptive test (CAT) 
for fatigue in RA.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
165 Many patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) compla in about fatigue. 1,2  It is not yet 
understood which mechanisms cause fatigue in RA. 3 Most patients try to manage their 
fatigue by trial and error and report to receive no  adequate medical or para-medical 
support. 4 Patients experience fatigue as a multidimensional,  annoying symptom with far-
reaching consequences. 5-8 They mention not only physical experiences, but al so cognitive 
and emotional elements of fatigue. Patients describ e their fatigue being different from 
normal tiredness, as it is often more extreme, not always caused by high levels of activity 
and therefore unpredictable. 6  
The issue of fatigue was raised by patients and tho roughly discussed on OMERACT 
meetings (international group of experts on outcome  measures in rheumatology). 9 
Thereupon, fatigue was recommended to be included i n the core set of outcome variables 
in clinical trials. 10,11  The number of studies on RA using fatigue as outco me rapidly 
increased over the last years.  
Measuring fatigue provides important information fo r the understanding of the patients´ 
perspective on disease impact and outcome. 12  The measurement of fatigue with single 
item scales has some but limited value, 12  since it does not correspond to the 
multidimensional character of fatigue. 5-8  
Existing multi-item measurement instruments that in clude scales about aspects of fatigue, 
as the Short Form 36 subscale vitality (SF-36), 13  Functional Assessment of Chronic Illness 
Therapy Fatigue Scale (FACIT-F), 14  Profile of Mood States subscale fatigue/inertia 
(POMS), 15  and the Multidimensional Assessment of Fatigue sca le (MAF), 16  have the 
shortcoming of unsatisfactory content validity for fatigue in RA as they were not 
developed from the perspective of patients with RA.17  The opinion of patients and 
professionals in the field is essential in the deve lopment of questionnaire items to ensure 
content validity. 18,19  Only patients can report on the experience of fati gue, 9,20  where 
clinicians have the most experience with the outwar d manifestation of a symptom or 
condition. 20   
The recently constructed Bristol Rheumatoid Arthrit is Fatigue Multi-Dimensional 
Questionnaire (BRAF-MDQ) 21  includes the patients´ perspective and is multidim ensional, 
but has as previously mentioned questionnaires, a t raditional format. That means the 
instruments are fixed length-questionnaires. Using them is time consuming because 
patients have to answer questions that may not appl y to their personal situation. Also, 
fixed lengths-questionnaires suffer from repeated t esting-effects because a patient always 
fills in the same questions and so can easily remem ber the questions and previously given 
answers. Furthermore, existing questionnaires do no t capture all aspects of fatigue that 
should be measured. 22  So there is a need for more appropriate and effici ent ways of 
measurement. 166 Computerized adaptive testing (CAT) is a promising technology as it provides the 
possibility to comprehensively measure patient repo rted outcomes (PROs) with relatively 
few items. 23  The burden for patients decreases since it is no l onger necessary that 
everybody answers the same questions and consequent ly all items of a questionnaire. 
Using a CAT increases measurement precision since i tems are sequentially selected from a 
calibrated item bank, based on the previous answer of this patient. In this way precise 
measurement at individual level with few items beco mes possible. For the computerized 
selection of the best matching items, a large item bank is needed that contains much 
more items than are finally presented to an individ ual patient. 24  Before a CAT can be 
developed, an item bank has to be scaled. In contra st with classical test theory, with item 
response theory (IRT), item parameters such as the difficulty level can be estimated for 
each individual item as well as the scale values fo r fatigue levels. 24  In our case this means 
that we can estimate the level of fatigue reflected  by the item. All items are placed on this 
continuum, ranging from no fatigue to severe fatigu e. 
Furthermore, with IRT it can be calculated how well  an item discriminates between more 
or less fatigued patients. This information is requ ired to optimally match the items to the 
patient’s individual level and this information sup ports inter-individual comparisons on 
the measured construct even if patients filled in d ifferent items. Primarily, CAT was used 
for ability and achievement testing, and it is an u pcoming and innovative domain in 
medical settings. 25  A joined initiative is developing a Patient-Report ed Outcome 
Measurement Information System (PROMIS) aiming to c onstruct a large item bank and 
CAT system for the assessment of PROs in chronic di seases. 26  CATs for depression, anxiety 
and stress perception turned out to be reliable, va lid and efficient instruments that 
measure more precisely than traditional questionnai res. 27-29  Moreover, they are less time 
consuming so that the burden for patients is reduce d.  
We aim to develop a CAT fatigue in RA. So, we const ructed an item pool to measure 
fatigue that is based on the patients´ perspective.  To ensure that all relevant aspects of 
fatigue are included, we made several steps. First,  we conducted in-depths interviews to 
describe the individual experience of fatigue. 8 Secondly, we examined whether groups of 
patients can be distinguished that experience fatig ue in different ways. For this end we 
used Q-methodology 30  whereby patients sorted cards with statements abou t their fatigue. 
These statements informed the new item formulations . In a third step, a preliminary item 
pool was constructed. Aim was to build up a large a nd comprehensive item pool to cover 
all dimensions of fatigue experience in RA. Therefo re we included all items and 
dimensions of validated fatigue scales in RA, and s upplemented them with items from 
interview material and Q-sort study.  To check for possibly missing aspects we also 
examined fatigue questionnaires not validated for R A. This procedure resulted in 294  
167 items distributed over 12 dimensions (severity, fre quency, duration, changes in fatigue, 
perceived causes of fatigue, energy, sleep/rest, bo dy feeling, cognition/concentration, 
coping, negative emotions/mood, consequences). 
In a next step, the item pool was evaluated in a De lphi study with experts from the 
Netherlands (patients, nurses, rheumatologists) to select adequate items and dimensions 
to measure fatigue in RA. 31-33  Items were included if 80% of participants rated i tems as 
adequate, reject if 50% or less rated an item as ad equate, and remaining items were 
discussed and adjusted according to suggestions and  comments of the participants and 
presented for re-evaluation. After two rounds all i tems were included or rejected. The 
final content valid item pool consisted of 245 item s and 12 dimensions.   
This consecutive study is intended to calibrate and  factor analyze these items to finally 
build the CAT RA fatigue. We do not intend to devel op one CAT for each dimension of 
fatigue, but to produce a multidimensional instrume nt. Multidimensional adaptive testing 
provides not only information about the level of a participant on each dimension, but also 
about the amount of association between dimensions in the population. 34  The cross-
information gained from items of correlated dimensi ons can be effectively modeled by 
multidimensional IRT. It facilitates CAT by support ing the selection of optimal, informative 
items, and by supporting the estimation of ability with optimal precision. According to 
Segall, 34  multidimensional adaptive testing offers equal or even higher precision with 
approximately one third fewer items than would be n eeded in unidimensional adaptive 
testing. So, the increased measurement efficiency m anifests itself by both, greater 
precision as well as reduced test lengths. 34  With this innovative method, measuring 
fatigue in RA can become more precise and at the sa me time more user-friendly.  
 
 
PATIENTS AND METHODS 
 
Patients 
Altogether 999 patients with RA of the Ziekenhuis G roep Twente (Almelo and Hengelo) 
and the Arthritis Center Twente at Medical Spectrum  Twente (Enschede) were invited for 
participation. The potential participants were invi ted via a letter from their 
rheumatologist, informing them about the aim of the  study and details about 
participation. Each letter was accompanied by a que stionnaire consisting of one version of 
the fatigue questionnaire, an informed consent form  and a paid return envelope.  
 
 
 168 Questionnaire  
 
Patient characteristics 
The questionnaire started with questions about demo graphic characteristics (gender, date 
of birth, marital status, level of education, work status) and disease characteristics (year of 
disease onset, comorbidities).  
 
Disease related measures  
Patients filled in eleven-point numerical rating sc ales (NRS) for pain and impact of the 
disease, and three fatigue NRS 21  for severity (‘Please circle the number which show s your 
average level of fatigue during the past 7 days’ (a nchors: no fatigue—totally exhausted); 
impact (‘Please circle the number which shows the e ffect fatigue has had on your life 
during the past 7 days’ (anchors: no effect—a great  deal of effect); and coping (‘Please 
circle the number which shows how well you have cop ed with fatigue over the past 7 
days’ (anchors: not at all well—very well). As thes e three NRSs were developed in the UK, 
they were translated into Dutch according to the re commended translation procedure for 
cross-cultural adaptation. 35  Furthermore, patients completed the 10-item versio n of the 
HAQ-II. 36  
 
Fatigue items 
Due to the large amount of items in our item pool, it was not feasible to let each 
participant fill in all fatigue items of our item p ool. The burden of answering 245 questions 
about fatigue would be too high, so we prepared dif ferent versions of questionnaires 
containing between 103 and 126 items. This resulted  in a common-item linking design.37  
That means that each questionnaire version consists  of a different composition of 
dimensions and items, but also has some sets of ite ms in common (see appendix 1 at the 
end of this article for the item administration des ign). In this way, items and dimensions of 
the different questionnaire versions can be related  to each other in the IRT analysis. 37  
Our previous Delphi study revealed 12 content valid  dimensions of fatigue; 32  “severity”, 
“frequency”, “duration”, “changes in fatigue”, “per ceived causes of fatigue”, “energy”, 
“sleep/rest”, “body feeling”, “cognition/concentrat ion”, “coping”, “negative 
emotions/mood”, “consequences”. However, some of th e dimensions are closely related 
to each other (e.g. severity, frequency and duratio n are all about the manifestation of 
fatigue) and are measured as one dimension in other  fatigue questionnaires. They were 
combined in the further analyses. In contrast, othe r dimensions, as came forward from 
the Delphi study, are not yet frequently covered by  fatigue scales (e.g. changes in fatigue, 
perceived causes of fatigue and coping with fatigue ) and therefore separately included in  
169 the further analysis. By this means we wanted to fi nd out how these dimensions, 
consisting of many newly constructed items, would f it in the IRT model. An overview of 
the original and newly formed dimensions (“severity ”, “physical”, “mental”, “changes in 
fatigue”, “perceived causes of fatigue”, “coping” a nd “consequences”) is given in Table 1. 
 
 
 
Table 1  Dimensions of fatigue, summarized for IRT analysis  
Original dimensions      Larger dimensions 
-Severity, frequency, duration     SEVERITY 
-Sleep/rest, body feeling, energy  
(items of the energy dimension were split up into    PHYSICAL 
physical and mental, depending on their content) 
-Cognition/concentration, negative emotions/mood, e nergy  MENTAL 
-Changes in fatigue -  “new” dimension    CHANGES I N FATIGUE 
-Perceived causes of fatigue – “new” dimension   PE RCEIVED CAUSES 
- Coping – “new” dimension     COPING 
-Consequences - was already a very large dimension   CONSEQUENCES  
 
 
 
Analyses 
Aim of the analyses was to build a between-items-mu lti-dimensional IRT model to create 
an initial calibration for an item bank to run a CA T.  The objective was to define the 
dimensions using the seven previously described dim ensions, but to aim at a lower 
dimensionality. Four steps were executed.   
 
Step 1: Initial item selection  
For each dimension, the fit to a unidimensional IRT  model and the measurement quality 
was investigated. Because of the incomplete item ad ministration design, this was done 
using IRT and not using classical test theory. For each of the seven dimensions, an IRT 
analysis was conducted with public domain software MIRT 38  under the generalized partial 
credit model (GPCM). 39  This two-parameter logistic model is applicable to  analyze 
polytomous items, meaning items with more than two response options, and allows the 
items within a scale to differ in discrimination pa rameter values. 40   
The discrimination parameter is highly correlated w ith the item/rest-score. 41  The 
item/rest-score-correlation is the correlation betw een a specific item response and the 
total score without the specific item. In classical  test theory it is used as an indication for 
the contribution of the item to the reliability of the test. We dismissed all items with a 
discrimination parameter below 0.60. Such items con tribute little to the overall reliability 170 and will not be selected in the CAT anyway. A low d iscrimination parameter means that an 
item does not discriminate well between more or les s fatigued persons. Further, we 
excluded items with an item misfit-index larger tha n 0.10. 42  Misfit is present if the 
probability to respond in the different categories of the item varies across subgroups of 
patients or the same level of fatigue. 43  
 
Step 2: IRT analysis of the fit for the separate or iginal dimensions after removal of the 
unreliable items.  
We repeated the IRT analyses carried out in step 1,  but without the excluded items. The 
number of significant model tests and reliabilities  as estimated under the GPCM, are 
provided in the result section. If the data strictl y fit the model, the percentage of model 
tests which are significant at the 5% level should also be approximately 5%. 
 
Step 3: determining the dimensionality of the item pool 
A problem was that the dataset has too many items ( K=196) to run exploratory analyses in 
standard software such as Mplus. To solve this prob lem, further analyses were conducted 
on IRT-based person parameter estimates. To account  for measurement error, the seven 
dimensions were split up into two parts, containing  odd and even items, and plausible 
values of the person parameters were drawn for both  sets. 44  So the input for MPlus 
consisted of 14 variables for each patient.  For th e interpretation of model fit, the root 
mean square error of approximation (RMSEA) was used  as criterion. A RMSEA value 
smaller or equal to 0.05 indicates a close fit betw een the observed correlation matrix and 
the correlation matrix expected under the model. Va lues between 0.05 and 0.08 suggest a 
reasonable approximation.  
 
Step 4: Confirmative MIRT analysis using the result s of step 3.  
In step 4, the results of the exploratory analysis in step 3 were further confirmed using 
multdimensional IRT to end up with a model suited f or item bank calibration and CAT. To 
evaluate the fit to the IRT model, counts of signif icant item tests were used. 
 
 
 
Participants 
We received 551 completed questionnaires, a respons e rate of 55%. The sample consisted 
of 367 women, 164 men and 20 persons who did not fi ll in their sex. Mean age was 63.38 
(SD=12.7) and the mean disease duration was 15.15 y ears (SD=11.22). The level of fatigue, 
measured with the NRS, was 4.89 (SD=2.3), ranging f rom 0 to 10, showing that a broad  
171 range of fatigue was represented among the particip ants. More information about the 
sample is shown in tables 2 and 3. 
 
 
Table 2 Sample characteristics (N=551) 
     Mean (S.D.)           Range 
Age in years    63.38 (12.70)          24 - 92  
Disease duration in years   15.15 (11.22)            0 - 67 
NRS General health      4.54 (2.11)            0 - 10  
NRS Pain       4.38 (2.38)            0 - 10 
NRS Fatigue severity                   4.89 (2.30)            0 - 10 
NRS Impact of fatigue                   4.62 (2.53)             0 - 10 
NRS Coping with fatigue             6.50 (2.02)            0 - 10 
HAQ-II score      1.00 (0.65)            0 - 3            
NRS= Numerical Rating Scale, HAQ=Health Assessment Questionnaire  
 
 
 
 
 
Table 3  Sample characteristics (N=551)    
       N 
Sex 
Women       367   
Men       164  
Marital status 
 Single      27   
 Living with partner/married    412   
 Widow/widower     73 
 Divorced      33  
Level of education 
 Low (≤ 12 years of education)    362    
 Moderate (13-14 years of education)   109   
 High (≥ 14 years of education)    71    
Work status 
 Working full-time     58   
 Working part-time     89   
 Household/unemployed    105   
 Disabled/Retired     290   
Co-morbidities 
 Yes      260   
 No      291  
 
 
 172 RESULTS 
 
 
Step 1: Initial item selection 
We excluded 49 items due to unsatisfactory item cha racteristics; having a discriminative 
ability less than 0.60 and/or an absolute item fit index larger than 0.10. This applied to 
items in all dimensions. Table 1 shows the number o f excluded items per dimension.  
 
 
Step 2: IRT analysis of the fit for the separate or iginal dimensions after removal of the 
unreliable items  
We counted the number of significant model tests am ong the different questionnaire 
versions per dimension as provided by Lagrange test s for GPCM. They are provided in 
table 4. Also the reliabilities as estimated under the GPCM are shown per dimension. 
 
 
 
Table 4 Significant model test and reliability per dimensio n (estimated with GPCM) 
Dimension   significant model tests at 5%   reliabi lity    
Severity   24 of 104 (23.1 %)    0.959 
Physical   85 of 169 (50.3%)    0.975 
Mental   19 of 224 (8.5%)    0.974 
Consequences  19 of 307 (6.2%)    0.978 
Change   4 of 45 (8.9%)    0.701 
Perceived causes  13 of 79 (16.5%)    0.646 
Coping   12 of 88 (13.7%)    0.878 
 
 
 
Note that the percentages of significant model test s are too high for the “severity” and 
“physical” dimensions, so for these two dimensions unidimensionality was not supported. 
The percentages of significance probabilities for t he dimensions “mental”, 
“consequences” and “change”  were quite close to th e nominal significance probability of 
5%, so here unidimensionality was considered accept able. 
 
 
 
 
  
173 Step 3: determining the dimensionality of the item pool 
Four factor solutions were taken into account. The following results were found for the 
four analyses:  
 
1.  A factor solution with one dimension was rejected. The analysis resulted in a 
Root Mean Square Error of Approximation of 0.098, t hat is, RMSEA=0.098. 
The maximal bound for the RMSEA is usually taken as  0.05. The test of the 
hypothesis that the RMSEA is smaller than 0.05 was highly significant, that is, 
p(RMSEA≤0.05) < 0.001. 
 
2.  A model with two dimensions showed a good fit (RSME A= 0.049, 
p(RMSE≤0.05) = 0.485), but the dimensions were hard  to interpret, and the 
subsequent confirmatory MIRT analysis did not suppo rt between-items 
multidimensionality. All items loaded to some degre e on both dimension, 
resulting in an un-interpretable within-items MIRT model. 
 
3.  Three dimensions fitted well and lead to RMSE=0.041  (p(RMSE≤0.05) = 
0.534). This solution can also be interpreted in th eoretical terms. The first 
dimension (factor) consists of the original dimensi on 1 (severity of fatigue), 
the second dimension (factor) consists of the origi nal dimension 2 (physical), 
3 (mental), 4 (consequences) and 7 (coping) – all d imensions referring to the 
impact/consequences of fatigue in a broader sense, and the third dimension 
(factor) consists of the original dimensions 5 (cha nges) and 6 (perceived 
causes). These two latter dimensions contain severa l new formulated items 
and refer to aspects of the variability of fatigue.  
 
4.  Four dimensions (with the third dimension splitted into two dimensions: 5 
(changes) and 6 (perceived causes)) did not result in better model fit. That is, 
the likelihood ratio test of a model with three dim ensions against a model 
with four dimensions had a Chi-square value of 2.13 3 with 3 degrees of 
freedom. That is, using four dimensions did not sig nificantly improve model 
fit. 
 
 
 174 Step 4: Confirmative MIRT analysis using the 3-dime nsional model 
The three dimensional IRT model was compared with a  one-dimensional GPCM using a 
likelihood-ratio test. The value of the chi-square was 148, with 2 degrees of freedom, so 
the unidimensional model was clearly rejected. Anal ogous to the test of model fit of the 
original dimensions, fit to the IRT model was evalu ated using counts of significant item 
tests. This resulted in 90 tests significant at 5% out of 597 tests conducted (15%). The 
conclusion was that the model fit was reasonable. T he correlations of the latent variables 
in the multidimensional GPCM are shown in table 5. Note that the correlations are 
moderate.  
 
 
 
Table 5  Estimated correlations between the three dimension s 
                   Severity (1)                                      Impact (2)          Variability o f fatigue (3)   
1   1.000     0.495      0.247 
2     0.495      1.000      0.580 
3     0.247      0.580      1.000  
 
 
 
Conclusion of the data analysis 
The initially calibrated multidimensional item pool  consists of 196 items, spread among 
three dimensions; severity (severity), impact (phys ical, mental, consequences, coping) and 
variability (change, perceived causes). These items  are displayed in Appendix 2 of this 
article. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
175 DISCUSSION 
 
This study provided the first calibrated item pool for the multidimensional testing of 
fatigue in patients with RA, a necessity to develop  a multidimensional CAT for fatigue in 
RA. 
The strength of the item pool lies in its stepwise development from the patients´ 
perspective and the thorough selection of meaningfu l items and dimensions for the 
measurement of fatigue in RA. Before the statistica l analyses described in this paper, our 
item pool consisted of 245 items and 12 dimensions that were qualitatively evaluated by 
our expert panel. 31-33   
These dimensions were already summarized into large r categories for the construction of 
the linking design that we used for the composition  of the different versions of 
questionnaires that patients completed in this stud y. In IRT analysis, items with 
insufficient item characteristics were omitted from  the pool and consecutive factor 
analysis clearly showed that the model with three f actors fitted our item pool best.  
This solution also makes sense in theoretical terms . The first factor is the dimension 
“severity” (see table 2), containing items about th e intensity, frequency and duration of 
fatigue. The second factor embraces several relativ ely large dimensions; “physical”, 
“mental”, “consequences”, and “coping”. All the ite ms have in common that they are 
about impact of fatigue, on physical and mental lev el and impact directly related to 
different aspects of daily life as already included  in our previous dimension called 
“consequences”. That the dimension “coping” also be longs to the second factor is of 
special interest. It is one of the relative small d imensions, we did not summarize to a 
larger dimension for the IRT analysis because it co ntains items that are not frequently 
included in other fatigue instruments yet. Items ab out what people did or did not do to 
cope with their fatigue can also be regarded as a c onsequence or impact of fatigue 
because these behaviors are resulting from the fati gue. The two other “new” dimensions, 
namely “change” and “perceived causes” form the thi rd factor. They both do not contain 
items about the impact of fatigue, but refer to the  changing character described by 
patients 8 and the reasons patients attribute to their fatigu e. The third factor is clearly less 
stable than the first two in psychometric terms. Ho wever it reflects important aspects of 
the patient perspective on fatigue. In our aim to i nclude the patients´ perspective into 
measurement instruments, it is important to trade p sychometric results against 
information gained from experiences of patients. To  ensure that items from this less 
stable third factor will be drawn in the adaptive t esting process, it could be a possibility to 
place accordant restrictions on the CAT. 45   176 The results of this study are also important for th e ongoing discussion about the need for 
multidimensional measurement of fatigue in RA. Our findings clearly underline the 
importance of multidimensional measurement. In expl oratory factor analysis, the one-
dimensional model had to be rejected immediately. A lso when comparing the fit of the 
three-factor model with the one-dimensional model, the multidimensional model turned 
out to be better. This finding supports the view th at fatigue in RA should be measured 
multidimensionally. For this aim, single item instr uments as frequently used VAS fatigue 
scales are not appropriate. Adequate multidimension al measurement is not only essential 
for scientific purposes, as science needs precise m easures of fatigue to get more insight 
into fatigue and its causes and impact and to be ab le to evaluate interventions or 
treatments to reduce fatigue. 46  Also in clinical practice, appropriate measurement  of 
fatigue is important. Only by detailed measuring, u nderstanding fatigue in clinical practice 
is possible and in the end might stimulate the deve lopment of interventions.   
In conclusion, the calibrated item pool is thorough ly developed from the patients’ 
perspective and includes not only already establish ed aspects of fatigue, but also newer 
aspects that were brought up by patients. Furthermo re, it consists of three dimensions 
what matches the multidimensional character of fati gue that was repeatedly described by 
patients. 5-8 This multidimensional item pool forms the basis fo r the development of a 
multidimensional CAT. With this innovative measurem ent approach, it will be possible to 
measure fatigue in RA more precise and with few ite ms. 34     
However, also a limitation of the calibration has t o be mentioned. The study is conducted 
with a relatively small sample compared to other sa mples used for calibration studies. 25  
Therefore, it has to be found out how robust the re sults of this study are. Possibly, the 
third dimension (variability of fatigue) will work out better in an analysis with more 
patients. This study has to be regarded as first, e xplorative approach to form the basis for 
the development of a multidimensional CAT for fatig ue in RA. The product of this study is 
an initial calibrated item pool that will undergo f urther statistical examination in the 
future process of the multidimensional CAT developm ent.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
177 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
 
We would like to thank the participants in this stu dy: patients from Ziekenhuisgroep 
Twente (Almelo and Hengelo) and Arthritis Center Tw ente at Medical Spectrum Twente. 
Furthermore our thanks to rheumatologists and nurse s for supporting the recruitment of 
participants.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 178 REFERENCES 
 
1. Wolfe F, Hawley DJ, Wilson K. The prevalence and  meaning of fatigue in rheumatic 
disease. J Rheumatol 1996;23(8):1407-1417. 
2. Hewlett S, Carr M, Ryan S, Kirwan J, Richards P,  Carr A, et al. Outcomes generated by 
patients with rheumatoid arthritis: how important a re they? Musculoskeletal Care 
2005;3:131-142. 
3. Hewlett S, Chalder T, Choy E, Cramp F, Davis B, Dures E, et al. Fatigue in rheumatoid 
arthritis: time for a conceptual model. Rheumatolog y 2011;50:1004-1006. doi: 
10.1093/rheumatology/keq282  
4. Repping-Wuts H, van Riel P, van Achterberg T. Fa tigue in patients with rheumatoid 
arthritis: what is known and what is needed. Rheuma tology 2009;48:207-209. 
5. Belza Tack B. Fatigue in rheumatoid arthritis. C onditions, strategies, and consequences. 
Arthritis Care Res 1990;3:65-70. 
6. Hewlett S, Cockshott Z, Byron M, Kitchen K, Tipl er S, Pope D, et al. Patients' perceptions 
of fatigue in rheumatoid arthritis: overwhelming, u ncontrollable, ignored. Arthritis Care 
Res 2005;53:697-702. 
7. Repping-Wuts H, Uitterhoeve R, van Riel P, van A chterberg T. Fatigue as experienced by 
patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA): a qualitat ive study. Int J Nurs Stud 2008;45:995-
1002. 
8. Nikolaus S, Bode C, Taal E, van de Laar MAFJ. Ne w insights into the experience of fatigue 
among patients with rheumatoid arthritis: a qualita tive study. Ann Rheum Dis 
2010;69:895-897. 
9. De Wit M. From orphan outcome to darling pet – p atient participation at OMERACT and 
the emergence of fatigue as an important outcome fo r research. Ann Rheum Dis 
2010;69(Suppl3):23. 
10. Kirwan, J.R., Hewlett, S. Patient perspective: reasons and methods for measuring 
fatigue in rheumatoid arthritis. J Rheumatol 2007;3 4:1171-1173. 
11. Kirwan JR, Minnock P, Adebajo A et al. Patient perspective: fatigue as a recommended 
patient centered outcome measure in rheumatoid arth ritis. J Rheumatol 2007;34:1174-
1177. 
12. Minnock P, Kirwan J, Bresnihan B. Fatigue is a reliable, sensitive and unique outcome 
measure in rheumatoid arthritis. Rheumatology 2009; 48:1533-1536. 
13. Ware JE Jr, Sherbourne CD. The MOS 36-Item Shor t-Form Health Survey (SF-36). I. 
Conceptual framework and item selection. Med Care 1 992;30:473-483.  
179 14. Cella D, Yount S, Sorensen M, Chartash E, Sengu pta N, Grober J. Validation of the 
Functional Assessment of Chronic Illness Therapy Fa tigue Scale relative to other 
instrumentation in patients with rheumatoid arthrit is. J Rheumatol 2005;32:811-819. 
15. McNair D, Lorr M, Droppelman L (1992) Profile o f Mood States manual. New York: 
Multi-health Systems Inc. 
16. Belza Tack B. Dimensions and correlates of fati gue in older adults with rheumatoid 
arthritis (dissertation). San Francisco: University  of California; 1991. 
17. Hewlett S, Hehir M, Kirwan JR. Measuring fatigu e in rheumatoid arthritis: a systematic 
review of scales in use. Arthritis Rheum 2007;57(3) :429-439. 
18. Streiner DL, Norman GR. Health measurement scal es—a practical guide to their 
development and use. New York: Oxford University Pr ess; 2003. 
19. Fayers PM, Machin D. Quality of life—assessment , analysis and interpretation. 
Chichester: Wiley; 2000. 
20. Yorkston KM, Johnson K, Boesflug E, Skala J, Am tmann D. Communication about the 
experience of pain and fatigue in disability. Qual Life Res 2010;19:243–251. 
21. Nicklin J, Cramp F, Kirwan J, Greenwood R, Urba n M, Hewlett S. Measuring fatigue in 
rheumatoid arthritis: A cross-sectional study to ev aluate the Bristol Rheumatoid Arthritis 
Fatigue Multi-Dimensional questionnaire, visual ana logue scales, and numerical rating 
scales. Arthritis Care Res 2010;62(11):1559-1568. 
22. Nicklin J, Cramp F, Kirwan J, Urban M, Hewlett S. Collaboration with patients in the 
design of patient reported outcome measures: Captur ing the experience of fatigue in 
rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Care Res 2010;62:15 52-1558. 
23. Rose M, Bezjak A. Logistics of collecting patie nt-reported outcomes (PROs) in clinical 
practice: an overview and practical examples. Qual Life Res 2009;18:125-136. 
24. Wainer H. Computerized adaptive testing: a prim er. Lawrence Erlbaum Associate: 
Hillsdale, New Yersey; 1990. 
25. Walter OB. Adaptive tests for measuring anxiety  and depression. In: WJ van der 
Linden,  CAW Glas eds. Elements of adaptive testing . New York: Springer; 2010:123-136. 
26. Cella D, Yount S, Rothrock N, Gershon R, Cook K , Reeve B, et al. The patient-reported 
outcomes measurement information system (PROMIS): P rogress of an NIH Roadmap 
Cooperative Group during its first two years. Med C are 2007;45:I3-I11. 
27. Fliege H, Becker J, Walter OB, Rose M, Bjorner JB, Klapp BF. Evaluation of a computer-
adaptive test for the assessment of depression (D-C AT) in clinical application. Int J 
Methods Psychiatr Res 2009;18(1):23-36. 
28. Becker J, Fliege H, Kocalevent RD, Bjorner JB, Rose M, Walter OB, et al. Functioning 
and validity of a computerized adaptive test to mea sure anxiety (A-CAT). Depress Anxiety 
2008;25:182-194. 180 29. Kocalevent RD, Rose M, Becker J, Walter OB, Fli ege H, Bjorner JB, et al. An evaluation 
of patient-reported outcomes found computerized ada ptive testing was efficient in 
assessing stress perception. J Clin Epidemiol 2009; 62:278-287. 
30. Nikolaus S, Bode C, Taal E, van de Laar MAFJ. F our different patterns of fatigue in 
rheumatoid arthritis patients: results of a Q-sort study. Rheumatology 2010;49(11):2191-
2199.  
31. Nikolaus S, Bode C, Taal E, van de Laar MAFJ. S election of items for a computer-
adaptive test to measure fatigue in patients with r heumatoid arthritis – A Delphi 
approach. Qual Life Res. Published online 31 July 2 011. doi: 10.1007/s11136-011-9982-8 
32. Nikolaus S, Bode C, Taal E, van de Laar MAFJ. W hich dimensions of fatigue should be 
measured in patients with rheumatoid arthritis? – A  Delphi study. Musculoskeletal Care. 
Published online 11 November 2011. doi: 10.1002/msc .222 
33. Nikolaus S, Bode C, Taal E, van de Laar MAFJ (i n press). Experts’ evaluations of fatigue 
questionnaires used in rheumatoid arthritis – A Del phi study among patients, nurses and 
rheumatologists in the Netherlands. Clin Exp Rheuma tol. 
34. Segall DO. Principles of Multidimensional Adapt ive Testing. In: WJ van der Linden, CAW 
Glas eds. Elements of Adaptive Testing. Statistics for Social and Behavioral Sciences, 
Springer; 2010:57-75. 
35. Guillemin F, Bombardier C, Beaton D. Cross-cult ural adaptation of health-related 
quality of life measures: literature review and pro posed guidelines. J Clin Epidemiol 
1993;46:1417–. 
36. Wolfe F, Michaud K, Pincus T. Development and v alidation of the Health Assessment 
Questionnaire II. Arthritis Rheum 2004;50:3296-305.  
37. Reckase MD. Linking and scaling. In: MD Reckase , Multidimensional Item Response 
Theory (pp. 275-310). Statistics for Social and Beh avioral Sciences. Springer; 2009. 
38. Glas CAW (2010). Software program Multidimensio nal Item Response Theory (MIRT). 
http://www.utwente.nl/gw/omd/afdeling/temp_test/mir t-manual.pdf  
 39. Muraki E. A generalized partial credit model: application of an EM algorithm. Appl 
Psychol Meas 1992;16:159-176. 
40. Embretson SE, Reise SP. Polytomous IRT models. In: Item response theory for 
psychologists (pp.95-124). Lawrence Erlbaum Associa tes, Publishers. London; 2000.  
41. Lord FM. Applications of item response theory t o practical testing problems. Hillsdale, 
NJ: Erlbaum; 1980. 
42. Van Groen MM, ten Klooster PM, Taal E, van de L aar MAFJ, Glas CAW. Applications of 
the health assessment questionnaire disability inde x to various rheumatic diseases. Qual 
Life Res 2010;19:1255-1263.  
181 43. Hambleton RK, Swainathan H, Rogers HJ. Identifi cation of potentially biased test items. 
In: Fundamentals of item response theory. Sage Publ ications; 1991.  
44. Thomas N, Gan N. Generating multiple imputation s for matrix sampling data analyzed 
with item response models. J Educ Behav Stat 1997;2 2,425-445. 
45. Van der Linden. Constrained adaptive testing wi th shadow tests. In: WJ van der Linden, 
CAW Glas eds. Elements of Adaptive Testing. Springe r; 2010:31-56. 
46. Hewlett S, Dures E, Almeida C. Measures of Fati gue. Arthritis Care Res, 2011;63,S263-
S286. Doi 10.1002/acr.20579.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 182  
 
 APPENDIX 1 : Table A1 Item administration design  
 
Booklet  Severity  
19 items Physical   
37 items Mental  
54 items Conse -
quences I        
43 items Conse -
quences II  42 items Change         
9 items Perceived 
causes I  9 items Perceived 
causes II  9 items Coping I   
12 items Coping II   
11 items Items  N 
1           106  80  
2           103  80  
3           112  79  
4           121  85  
5           108  77  
6           126  81  
7           113  69  
Larger 
dimen-sion 1 
 2 3 4 5 6 7 245  551  
Number 
excluded items 6 6 2 10  5 8 12  49   
Columns refer to the seven dimensions as used for t he analyses. The shaded areas refer to administered  items. The blank cells refer to not 
administered items. The last row refers to the numb er of items removed due to misfit or unreliability.   
183  
APPENDIX 2 
 
Preliminary fatigue item pool in Dutch 
 
 
Dimension “Severity” (13 items) 
 
Item Response options Origin 
Kruis het hokje aan dat uw gemiddelde mate van 
vermoeidheid gedurende de laatste 7 dagen 
weergeeft.  0 – 10 / 0 geen vermoeidheid, 10 totaal 
uitgeput  BRAF-MDQ 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen voelde ik me moe. 1 he lemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate FACIT-F 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen voelde ik me vermoeid.  1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate POMS 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen was vermoeidheid de 
ergste klacht als gevolg van mijn reuma. 1 - 5 / 1 helemaal niet mee eens, 5 
helemaal mee eens Interviews 
Voelde u zich moe gedurende de laatste 7 dagen?     1 altijd, 2 meestal, 3 soms, 4 zelden, 5 
nooit     SF-36 
Op hoeveel dagen ervoer u vermoeidheid in de 
afgelopen week (7 dagen)?     0 1 2 3 4 5 6 elke dag     BRAF-MDQ 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen was ik op … vooral ´s 
avonds moe.  0 dagen, 1-2 dagen, 3-4 dagen, 4-5 dagen, 
5-6 dagen, elke dag  Interviews 
Voelde u zich vermoeid gedurende de laatste 7 dagen ?    1 altijd, 2 meestal, 3 soms, 4 zelden, 5 
nooit     SF-36 
Hoe vaak bent u in de afgelopen 7 dagen vermoeid 
geweest?   1 elke dag, 2 meestal, maar niet elke dag, 
3 af en toe, maar de meeste dagen niet, 4 
bijna nooit     MAF 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen was ik moe ook als ik 
niets buitengewoons had gedaan.   1 altijd, 2 meestal, 3 soms, 4 zelden, 5 
nooit  Interviews 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen werd ik gauw moe als i k 
met iets bezig was. 1 altijd, 2 meestal, 3 soms, 4 zelden, 5 
nooit Interviews 
Hoe lang duurde iedere periode van vermoeidheid 
gemiddeld in de afgelopen 7 dagen?    1 minder dan een uur, 2 meerdere uren, 3 
de hele dag     BRAF-MDQ 
Als u denkt aan de laatste 7 dagen; hoe veel uur wa s u 
per dag gemiddeld vermoeid? 1 = minder dan een uur, 2 = ongeveer 1-4 
uur, 3 = ongeveer 5-8 uur, 4 = meer dan 8 
uur Interviews 
 
 
 184  
Dimension “Impact” (169 items) 
 
Item Response options Origin 
Had u veel energie gedurende de laatste 7 dagen?     1 altijd, 2 meestal, 3 soms, 4 zelden, 5 
nooit       SF-36 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen voelde ik me actief.     1 altijd, 2 meestal, 3 soms, 4 zelden, 5 
nooit       Lee fatigue 
scale 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen voelde ik me fit.    1  altijd, 2 meestal, 3 soms, 4 zelden, 5 
nooit       CIS 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen voelde ik me 
afgemat. 1 altijd, 2 meestal, 3 soms, 4 zelden, 5 
nooit     POMS 
Had u een gebrek  aan LICHAMELIJKE energie door 
uw vermoeidheid gedurende de laatste 7 dagen?     1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate   BRAF-MDQ 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen voelde ik me 
uitgerust.     1 altijd, 2 meestal, 3 soms, 4 zelden, 5 
nooit CIS/MFSI 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen kon ik de hele dag 
wel slapen. 1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate          Lee fatigue 
scale 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen voelde ik me sloom 
door de vermoeidheid. 1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate      Interviews 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen had ik behoefte aan 
slaap overdag. 1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate FACIT-F 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen moest ik eerst even 
rusten nadat ik iets gedaan had. 1 altijd, 2 meestal, 3 soms, 4 zelden, 5 
nooit Interviews 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen had ik langere 
rustperiodes nodig door de vermoeidheid. 1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate Interviews 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen moest ik vroeg naar 
bed om te kunnen blijven functioneren. 1 altijd, 2 meestal, 3 soms, 4 zelden, 5 
nooit  Interviews 
Hoe vaak had u gedurende de laatste 7 dagen 
genoeg energie om de dag door te komen zonder te 
rusten of te slapen? 1 altijd, 2 vaak, 3 soms, 4 zelden, 5 nooit  Interv iews 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen was ik slaperig. 1 alt ijd, 2 meestal, 3 soms, 4 zelden, 5 
nooit Interviews 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen moest ik door de 
vermoeidheid tijdens mijn bezigheden pauzes 
nemen om weer bij te komen.  1 altijd, 2 meestal, 3 soms, 4 zelden, 5 
nooit  Interviews 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen moest ik meer dan 
normaal slapen (´s nachts en mogelijk over dag) om 
te kunnen blijven functioneren. 
 1 altijd, 2 meestal, 3 soms, 4 zelden, 5 
nooit  Interviews  
185 Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen had ik de behoefte 
om mijn ogen dicht te doen als ik moe was. 1 altijd, 2 vaak, 3 soms, 4 zelden, 5 nooit  Interv iews 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen moest ik regelmatig 
slapen om te kunnen functioneren (bijvoorbeeld 
steeds ongeveer op dezelfde tijd naar bed, 
ongeveer hetzelfde aantal uren slapen). 1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate Interviews 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen had ik pijn als ik moe  
was. 1 altijd, 2 meestal, 3 soms, 4 zelden, 5 
nooit  Interviews 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen voelde ik me 
lichamelijk in een slechte conditie. 1 altijd, 2 meestal, 3 soms, 4 zelden, 5 
nooit CIS 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen voelde ik me 
lichamelijk vermoeid.  1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate Interviews 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen voelde ik me 
krachteloos door mijn vermoeidheid. 1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate FACIT-F 
Door mijn vermoeidheid zat ik gedurende de laatste 
7 dagen niet lekker in mijn vel.  1 altijd, 2 meestal, 3 soms, 4 zelden, 5 
nooit Interviews 
Had u door de vermoeidheid gedurende de laatste 
7 dagen moeite om met andere reumaklachten 
(bijvoorbeeld pijn of stijfheid) om te gaan? 1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate Interviews 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen voelde de 
vermoeidheid als een lichamelijke last. 1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate Interviews 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen had ik minder kracht 
in mijn spieren door de vermoeidheid. 1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate FQ/ProF 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen kon ik moeilijk op 
mijn benen staan door mijn vermoeidheid. 1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate Interviews 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen had ik een zwaar 
gevoel in mijn hoofd door mijn vermoeidheid. 1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate Interviews 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen was ik misselijk van 
vermoeidheid. 1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate Interviews 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen was ik duizelig van 
vermoeidheid. 1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate Interviews 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen had ik 
coördinatieproblemen (bijvoorbeeld struikelen, 
naast voorwerpen grijpen, voorwerpen laten vallen) 
door mijn vermoeidheid.  1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate Interviews  
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen voelde ik me 
lusteloos (futloos).     1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate FACIT 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen voelde ik me 
energiek. 1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate 
 FACIT 186 Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen had ik door de 
vermoeidheid minder zin in bepaalde activiteiten.     1 altijd, 2 meestal, 3 soms, 4 zelden, 5 
nooit       Interviews 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen was mijn energie 
gauw op als ik iets deed.     1 altijd, 2 meestal, 3 soms, 4 zelden, 5 
nooit   Interviews 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen had ik genoeg 
energie om leuke dingen te doen. 1 altijd, 2 meestal, 3 soms, 4 zelden, 5 
nooit     CIS 
Had u een gebrek  aan MENTALE energie 
(bijvoorbeeld energie om goed over iets na te 
denken, plannen te maken, creatief te zijn) door uw  
vermoeidheid gedurende de laatste 7 dagen? 1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate    BRAF-MDQ 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen had ik te weinig 
energie om mijn plannen uit te kunnen voeren. 1 altijd, 2 meestal, 3 soms, 4 zelden, 5 
nooit     CIS 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen was ik nergens in 
geïnteresseerd door mijn vermoeidheid. 1 altijd, 2 meestal, 3 soms, 4 zelden, 5 
nooit     CFS 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen voelde ik me duf 
door de vermoeidheid.  1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate          Interviews 
Heeft u gedurende de laatste 7 dagen dingen 
vergeten door uw vermoeidheid?     1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate BRAF-MDQ 
Maakte uw vermoeidheid het gedurende de laatste 
7 dagen moeilijk helder na te denken?     1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate    BRAF-MDQ 
Maakte uw vermoeidheid het gedurende de laatste 
7 dagen moeilijk u te concentreren?    1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate BRAF-MDQ 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen was ik door mijn 
vermoeidheid minder gemotiveerd om iets te doen 
waar ik bij na moest denken.    1 altijd, 2 meestal, 3 soms, 4 zelden, 5 
nooit     FIS 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen was ik door mijn 
vermoeidheid minder goed in staat om taken af te 
maken waar ik bij na moest denken.     1 altijd, 2 meestal, 3 soms, 4 zelden, 5 
nooit     FIS 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen kostte het me veel 
moeite ergens mijn aandacht bij te houden als ik 
moe was. 1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate      Interviews 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen had ik door mijn 
vermoeidheid moeite beslissingen te nemen. 1 altijd, 2 meestal, 3 soms, 4 zelden, 5 
nooit    FIS 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen was ik te moe om te 
lezen.  1 altijd, 2 meestal, 3 soms, 4 zelden, 5 
nooit Interviews 
Hoe vaak voelde u zich minder alert door uw 
vermoeidheid?     1 altijd, 2 vaak, 3 soms, 4 zelden, 5 nooit        Interviews 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen ging denken 
langzamer dan normaal door mijn vermoeidheid.  
 1 altijd, 2 meestal, 3 soms, 4 zelden, 5 
nooit     FIS  
187 Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen was het door de 
vermoeidheid moeilijk mijn gedachten op een rij te 
zetten. 1 altijd, 2 meestal, 3 soms, 4 zelden, 5 
nooit     FIS 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen was ik sneller 
prikkelbaar door de vermoeidheid. 1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate Interviews 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen kostte denken 
inspanning door mijn vermoeidheid.    1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate  Interviews 
Heeft u gedurende de laatste 7 dagen vergissingen 
gemaakt door uw vermoeidheid?     1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate BRAF-MDQ 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen raakte ik in de war 
door vermoeidheid.     1 vaak, 2 soms, 3 zelden, 4 nooit MFSI 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen vond ik het 
frustrerend als ik te moe was om de dingen te doen 
die ik wilde doen.    1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate FACIT-F 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen was ik boos over 
mijn vermoeidheid.     1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate Interviews 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen werd ik moedeloos 
van mijn vermoeidheid.     1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate Interviews 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen was ik verdrietig 
door mijn vermoeidheid.     1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate Interviews 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen maakte ik me zorgen 
over mijn vermoeidheid.     1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate Interviews 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen raakte ik snel 
geïrriteerd door mijn vermoeidheid.     1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate Interviews 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen zag ik overal tegen 
op als ik moe was.     1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate Interviews 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen kon ik minder van 
leuke dingen genieten door de vermoeidheid.     1 altijd, 2 meestal, 3 soms, 4 zelden, 5 
nooit           Interviews 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen heeft de 
vermoeidheid mijn kwaliteit van leven verminderd.   1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate Interviews 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen was ik chagrijnig 
door mijn vermoeidheid.     1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate Interviews 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen voelde ik me 
nutteloos door mijn vermoeidheid.     1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate Interviews 
Had u gedurende de laatste 7 dagen het gevoel 
door vermoeidheid minder controle te hebben over 
uw leven?     1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate BRAF-MDQ 
Ik heb door de vermoeidheid de interesse verloren 
in dingen die ik eerder deed.     1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate  FQ 
 188 Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen voelde ik me 
gespannen door de vermoeidheid.     1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate Lee fatigue 
scale 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen heeft de 
vermoeidheid mij stress opgeleverd.  1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate Interviews 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen voelde ik me 
machteloos door de vermoeidheid.  1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate Interviews 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen ben ik onverschillig 
geweest door mijn vermoeidheid.    1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate  CFS 
Voelde u zich gedurende de laatste 7 dagen somber 
of neerslachtig door uw vermoeidheid?    1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate   BRAF-MDQ 
Door mijn vermoeidheid had ik gedurende de 
laatste 7 dagen minder zelfvertrouwen. 1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate   Interviews 
 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen zat ik over mijn 
vermoeidheid te piekeren.   1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate  Interviews 
Hoe vaak dacht u gedurende de laatste 7 dagen 
over uw vermoeidheid na?     1 altijd, 2 vaak, 3 soms, 4 zelden, 5 nooit      In terviews 
 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen kon ik minder 
hebben dan gewoonlijk door mijn vermoeidheid.  1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate Interviews 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen voelde ik me door de 
vermoeidheid minder prettig. 1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate Interviews 
Maakte uw vermoeidheid u gedurende de laatste 7 
dagen van streek?   1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate     BRAF-MDQ 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen voelde ik me huilerig 
door mijn vermoeidheid.    1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate   Interviews 
Hoe vaak was u emotioneel vermoeid gedurende de 
laatste 7 dagen?     1 altijd, 2 vaak, 3 soms, 4 zelden, 5 nooit     Int erviews 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen voelde ik me schuldig 
als ik te moe was om die dingen te doen die ik 
gewoonlijk doe.   1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate     Wu fatigue 
scale 
Hoe vaak was u gedurende de laatste 7 dagen te 
moe om zich gelukkig te voelen?    1 altijd, 2 vaak, 3 soms, 4 zelden, 5 nooit Intervi ews 
Kruis een hokje aan om het effect dat vermoeidheid 
de laatste 7 dagen op uw leven heeft gehad weer te 
geven.     0-10 / 0 = Geen effect, 10 = Heel veel 
effect     NRS Nicklin et al 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen moest ik door de 
vermoeidheid altijd opletten niet te veel te doen.   1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate   Interviews 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen kon ik activiteiten 
minder lang volhouden door de vermoeidheid.    1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate   Interviews 
  
189 Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen kostte het me 
moeite om met dingen te BEGINNEN omdat ik zo 
moe was.     1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate   FACIT-F 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen kon ik minder doen 
dan ik zou willen door mijn vermoeidheid.     1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate   Interviews 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen heeft de 
vermoeidheid mij herhaaldelijk problemen 
veroorzaakt.   1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate   Interviews 
 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen was het door de 
vermoeidheid moeilijk om de dag door te komen.  1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate   Interviews 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen voelde vanwege mijn 
vermoeidheid alles wat ik deed als een inspanning.  1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate   Interviews 
Maakte uw vermoeidheid het gedurende de laatste 
7 dagen moeilijk uw werk of andere dagelijkse 
activiteiten uit te voeren?  1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate     BRAF-MDQ 
In de afgelopen 7 dagen, hoe heeft vermoeidheid u 
belemmerd om te werken?  1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate, 5 niet van toepassing    MAF 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen moest ik door de 
vermoeidheid meer tijd nemen voor activiteiten. 1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate Interviews 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen kon ik bepaalde 
verantwoordelijkheden niet aan vanwege mijn 
vermoeidheid (bijv. op mijn werk of binnen het 
gezin). 1 altijd, 2 meestal, 3 soms, 4 zelden, 5 
nooit Interviews 
Gedurende de afgelopen 7 dagen kwam er minder 
uit mijn handen door mijn vermoeidheid dan ik had 
gewild. 1 altijd, 2 vaak, 3 soms, 4 zelden, 5 nooit Intervi ews 
Ik vind dat ik gedurende de laatste 7 dagen weinig 
deed op een dag door mijn vermoeidheid.   1 - 5 / 1 helemaal niet mee eens, 5 
helemaal mee eens CIS 
In de afgelopen 7 dagen, hoe heeft vermoeidheid u 
belemmerd om huishou-delijke taken en klussen in 
huis te doen?     1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate MAF 
Gedurende de afgelopen 7 dagen was het moeilijk 
te klussen (in huis of in de tuin) door mijn 
vermoeidheid.    1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate Interviews 
In de afgelopen 7 dagen, hoe heeft vermoeidheid u 
belemmerd om te koken? 1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate, 5 niet van toepassing    MAF 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen moest ik mijn sociale 
activiteiten beperken omdat ik moe was.     1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate     FACIT-F 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen was ik te moe om 
anderen te helpen.     1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate Interviews 190 Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen had ik door mijn 
vermoeidheid minder zin in sociale activiteiten. 1 altijd, 2 meestal, 3 soms, 4 zelden, 5 
nooit FIS 
In de afgelopen 7 dagen, hoe heeft vermoeidheid u 
belemmerd om op bezoek te gaan bij of tijd door te 
brengen met vrienden of familie?     1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate MAF 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen was ik door mijn 
vermoeidheid beperkt in mijn contacten met 
familie, vrienden en kennissen. 1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate   Interviews 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen had ik door mijn 
vermoeidheid niet veel sociale contacten 
buitenshuis.     1 altijd, 2 meestal, 3 soms, 4 zelden, 5 
nooit FIS 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen maakte ik me zorgen 
hoe ik door de vermoeidheid op andere mensen 
overkwam.   1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate   Interviews 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen was ik sneller moe 
dan andere mensen van mijn leeftijd.   1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate Interviews 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen was ik te moe om 
voldoende te eten.    1 altijd, 2 meestal, 3 soms, 4 zelden, 5 
nooit FACIT-F 
 
In de afgelopen 7 dagen, hoe heeft vermoeidheid u 
belemmerd om een bad / douche te nemen of u te 
wassen?    1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate  MAF 
Had u gedurende de laatste 7 dagen moeite met 
bewegen door vermoeidheid?     1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate Interviews 
 
In de afgelopen 7 dagen, hoe heeft vermoeidheid u 
belemmerd om te lopen?  1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate MAF 
 
In de afgelopen 7 dagen, hoe heeft uw 
vermoeidheid u belemmerd om te bewegen 
(bijvoorbeeld wandelen, fietsen, sporten).  1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate MAF 
 
 
Door de vermoeidheid had ik gedurende de laatste 
7 dagen minder zin om iets te doen dat lichamelijk 
inspannend voor me is. 1 altijd, 2 meestal, 3 soms, 4 zelden, 5 
nooit  FIS 
 
 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen voelde ik me 
helemaal uitgeput na lichamelijke inspanning 
(bijvoorbeeld in verband met klussen, sporten).  1 altijd, 2 meestal, 3 soms, 4 zelden, 5 
nooit Interviews 
 
 
In de afgelopen 7 dagen, hoe heeft vermoeidheid u 
belemmerd om aan vrijetijds- en ontspannende 
bezigheden te doen?   1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate MAF 
 
  
191 Heeft u gedurende de laatste 7 dagen vermeden 
plannen te maken door uw vermoeidheid? 
Bijvoorbeeld plannen om uit te gaan, of klussen 
rondom huis of in de tuin te doen?     1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate BRAF-MDQ 
Om gedurende de laatste 7 dagen een ongewone 
activiteit (bijvoorbeeld winkelen, naar een feest 
gaan) te kunnen doen moest ik ter compensatie 
extra rust inplannen.     1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate Interviews 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen was het door de 
vermoeidheid moeilijk van tevoren iets te plannen 
(omdat ik niet wist hoe het op een ander moment 
met de vermoeidheid zou gaan). 1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate Interviews 
 
 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen was vermoeidheid 
een probleem.   1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate   Interviews 
 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen moest ik keuzes 
maken welke dingen ik wel of niet zou doen omdat 
ik te moe was om alles te doen. 1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate   Interviews 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen maakte de 
vermoeidheid het moeilijk om aan iets nieuws te 
beginnen.     1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate   Interviews 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen kostte het me 
moeite om dingen AF TE MAKEN omdat ik zo moe 
was.     1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate   FACIT-F 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen had ik last van 
vermoeidheid.   1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate FACIT-F 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen zag ik er erg tegen op  
om iets te doen door de vermoeidheid.    1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate   MFI 
Had u gedurende de laatste 7 dagen moeite het 
huis te verlaten door vermoeidheid?     1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate   Interviews 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen moest ik me dwingen 
om´smorgens op te staan en iets te doen, door de 
vermoeidheid. 1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate   Interviews 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen had ik door de 
vermoeidheid hulp nodig bij het doen van mijn 
gebruikelijke activiteiten.      1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 
in sterke mate   FACIT-F 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen moest ik mijn werk 
verminderen of veranderen vanwege 
vermoeidheid.  1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate     Interviews 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen was het moeilijk de 
auto te besturen door mijn vermoeidheid.  1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate, 5 niet van toepassing   CFS-APQ 
 192 Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen had de vermoeidheid 
een negatieve invloed op mijn relatie met collega's .   1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate, 5 niet van toepassing   Interviews 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen duurde het door de 
vermoeidheid langer dingen af te maken. 1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate Interviews 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen ervoer ik normale 
dagelijkse activiteiten als stressvol door mijn 
vermoeidheid.     1 altijd, 2 meestal, 3 soms, 4 zelden, 5 
nooit FIS 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen was het moeilijk 
vrijwilligerswerk te doen door mijn vermoeidheid.   1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate, 5 niet van toepassing    Interviews 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen was het moeilijk de 
computer te gebruiken door mijn vermoeidheid. 1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate, 5 niet van toepassing      CFS-APQ 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen was ik te moe om 
mijn belangrijkste taken goed te doen.     1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate Interviews 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen kon ik mijn taken 
minder goed doen door mijn vermoeidheid. 1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate Interviews 
In de afgelopen 7 dagen, hoe heeft vermoeidheid u 
belemmerd om boodschappen / een boodschap te 
doen? 1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate MAF 
Gedurende de afgelopen 7 dagen was het moeilijk 
het huishouden (schoonmaken, was, etc.) te doen 
door mijn vermoeidheid.     1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate Interviews 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen had mijn 
vermoeidheid een negatieve invloed op de relatie 
met mijn partner en/of andere naasten.     1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate     Interviews 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen maakte de 
vermoeidheid het moeilijk om het tempo van 
anderen vol te houden. Bijvoorbeeld tijdens een 
dagje uit met vrienden.     1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate Interviews 
Hoe werd u door de vermoeidheid belemmerd om 
seksueel actief te zijn de afgelopen 7 dagen? 1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate MAF 
Heeft uw vermoeidheid uw sociale leven aangetast 
gedurende de laatste 7 dagen?     1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate BRAF-MDQ 
 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen was het door de 
vermoeidheid lastig een gesprek te voeren.  1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate Interviews 
 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen was het door de 
vermoeidheid lastig in een grote groep mee te 
praten.     1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate Interviews 
 Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen was ik te moe om te 
praten.   1 vaak, 2 soms, 3 zelden, 4 nooit  Interviews  
193 Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen kon ik door de 
vermoeidheid moeilijk uit mijn woorden komen.    1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate Interviews 
Maakte uw vermoeidheid het gedurende de laatste 
7 dagen moeilijk een bad of douche te nemen?    1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate  BRAF-MDQ 
Maakte uw vermoeidheid het gedurende de laatste 
7 dagen moeilijk uzelf aan te kleden?     1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate BRAF-MDQ 
Hoe vaak was u gedurende de laatste 7 dagen te 
moe om een korte wandeling te ondernemen?    1 altijd, 2 meestal, 3 soms, 4 zelden, 5 
nooit Interviews 
Door de vermoeidheid kon ik gedurende de laatste 
7 dagen lichamelijke inspanning niet lang 
volhouden.     1 altijd, 2 meestal, 3 soms, 4 zelden, 5 
nooit FIS 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen kon ik door mijn 
vermoeidheid niet sporten.  1 altijd, 2 meestal, 3 soms, 4 zelden, 5 
nooit Interviews 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen was het door mijn 
vermoeidheid moeilijk om meer dan een verdieping 
met de trap te gaan.   1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate CFS-APQ 
 
Door de vermoeidheid was ik gedurende de laatste 
7 dagen minder goed in staat om lichamelijk 
inspannende taken af te maken. 1 altijd, 2 meestal, 3 soms, 4 zelden, 5 
nooit FIS 
 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen was het door mijn 
vermoeidheid moeilijk een uur te zitten.  1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate Interviews 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen was ik te moe om 
mijn hobby uit te oefenen.   1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate Interviews 
Heeft u gedurende de laatste 7 dagen plannen 
afgezegd vanwege uw vermoeidheid? Bijvoorbeeld 
plannen om uit te gaan, of klussen rondom huis of 
in de tuin te doen?     1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate BRAF-MDQ 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen was het door de 
vermoeidheid moeilijk met iets onverwachts 
(buiten de planning om) om te gaan.     1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate Interviews 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen kon ik goed met mijn 
vermoeidheid omgaan. 1 altijd, 2 meestal, 3 soms, 4 zelden, 5 
nooit       Interviews 
Ik zou mijn vermoeidheid van de afgelopen 7 dagen 
als normaal / abnormaal beschrijven.     1 - 10 / 1 = normaal, 10 = abnormaal     Piper scal e 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen moest ik altijd 
rekening houden met mijn vermoeidheid.     1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate Interviews 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen heb ik door mijn 
vermoeidheid taken moeten uitbesteden. 1 altijd, 2 meestal, 3 soms, 4 zelden, 5 
nooit Interviews 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen ervoer ik de 
vermoeidheid als een beperking.   1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate      Interviews 194 Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen ben ik meer gaan 
rusten vanwege mijn vermoeidheid (bijvoorbeeld 
gaan zitten of liggen, een ontspannende bezigheid, 
maar niet slapen). 1 altijd, 2 meestal, 3 soms, 4 zelden, 5 
nooit Interviews 
 
 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen ben ik meer gaan 
slapen vanwege mijn vermoeidheid.  1 altijd, 2 meestal, 3 soms, 4 zelden, 5 
nooit Interviews 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen heb ik mijn 
activiteiten moeten verdelen door mijn 
vermoeidheid.  1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate Interviews 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen heb ik vanwege mijn 
vermoeidheid situaties vermeden die mij stress 
opleveren. 1 altijd, 2 meestal, 3 soms, 4 zelden, 5 
nooit Interviews 
 
 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen werd ik ongeduldig 
als iets niet lukte door de vermoeidheid. 1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate Interviews 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen vond ik mijn 
vermoeidheid erg vervelend.    1 helemaal niet, 2 een beetje, 3 nogal, 4 in 
sterke mate Interviews 
 
 
 
 
Dimension “Variability” (14 items) 
 
Item Response options Origin 
Hoe is uw vermoeidheid veranderd in de afgelopen 
7 dagen?     1 toegenomen, 2 vermoeidheid is op en 
neer gegaan, 3 hetzelfde gebleven, 4 
afgenomen        MAF 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen was de duur  van mijn 
vermoeidheid wisselend. 1 ja, 2 nee Interviews 
Was het gedurende de laatste 7 dagen wisselend 
hoe vaak u vermoeid was? 1 ja, 2 nee  Interviews 
Gedurende de laatste 7 dagen was de ernst  van 
mijn vermoeidheid wisselend.  1 ja , 2 nee    Interviews 
Sporten veroorzaakt mijn vermoeidheid.     1 ja, 2 nee, 3 weet ik niet FAI 
Werk veroorzaakt mijn vermoeidheid.  1 ja, 2 nee, 3  weet ik niet  FAI 
Gewone dagelijkse activiteiten veroorzaken mijn 
vermoeidheid.    1 ja, 2 nee, 3 weet ik niet FAI 
Stress veroorzaakt mijn vermoeidheid.  1 ja, 2 nee,  3 weet ik niet   FAI 
De reumatoïde artritis veroorzaakt mijn 
vermoeidheid.     1 ja, 2 nee, 3 weet ik niet   FAI  
195 Slechte en / of weinig slaap veroorzaakt mijn 
vermoeidheid.  1 ja, 2 nee, 3 weet ik niet Interviews 
Drukte / te veel activiteiten veroorzaken mijn 
vermoeidheid.   1 ja, 2 nee, 3 weet ik niet Interviews 
Pijn en / of andere klachten veroorzaken mijn 
vermoeidheid.    1 ja, 2 nee, 3 weet ik niet  Interviews 
Mijn vermoeidheid wordt mede veroorzaakt door 
de medicijnen die ik moet gebruiken. 1 ja, 2 nee, 3 weet ik niet Delphi study 
Mijn vermoeidheid wordt door mijn 
reumamedicijnen veroorzaakt. 1 ja, 2 nee, 3 weet ik niet Delphi study 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 196  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
197  
 
 
 
Chapter 10 
 
 
 
Summary and general discussion 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 198 Summary 
 
This thesis explored the meaning of fatigue in RA f rom the perspective of the patients and 
provided an initially calibrated multidimensional i tem bank.  First, a systematic review 
about statistical predictors and impact of fatigue was conducted. Then, the difficulties of 
measuring treatment effects on fatigue in RA were d iscussed. Second, an item pool for the 
measurement of fatigue in RA was developed in four consecutive studies (interview study, 
Q-sort study, Delphi study and calibration study). The sequence of those studies followed 
a logical order; starting with qualitative research  on the experience of patients and ending 
up with a statistically calibrated item pool that w ill be used for the construction of a CAT 
for fatigue in RA.  
    
The first article included in this thesis ( chapter 2 ) gives an overview about the state of the 
art of research on statistical predictors of fatigu e in RA and the impact of fatigue on other 
outcomes. 1 Furthermore it describes differences and similarit ies in fatigue between 
different groups of patients. Studies found statist ical predictors of fatigue in illness-related 
aspects (e.g. pain), physical functioning (e.g. dis ability), cognitive/emotional functioning 
(e.g. depression) and social aspects (e.g. negative  interpersonal events). Additionally, 
female gender was associated with higher levels of fatigue. Remarkably, inflammatory 
activity (e.g. ESR, DAS28), showed an unclear relat ionship with fatigue in RA. Fatigue 
statistically predicted illness-related aspects (e. g. morning stiffness), physical functioning 
(e.g. physical quality of life), cognitive/emotiona l aspects (e.g. psychological distress) and 
social aspects (e.g. work ability). Patients with R A reported higher severity of fatigue than 
healthy controls. Fibromyalgia patients, however, r eported worse levels of fatigue than 
other patient groups. The most evidence for a relat ion between fatigue and other 
variables was found regarding pain, depression and physical functioning. Many cross-
sectional and also longitudinal studies reported th at they statistically predicted fatigue.                                                                                                      
Although several relations between fatigue and othe r variables were demonstrated, 
hardly conclusions about causality could be drawn b ased on the reviewed literature. Most 
studies were cross-sectional and not all longitudin al studies controlled for baseline 
fatigue. Prospective longitudinal  research with ap propriate designs and analyses is 
needed to learn about the multicausal relationships  of fatigue in RA and other variables.                                                                                                                   
 
Chapter 3 discusses the disappointing effects of biotherapies  on fatigue in RA found in a 
recent meta-analysis. 2 Two approaches to explain its results were propose d. First, it is 
possible that biotherapies are inefficacious to red uce fatigue in RA. We lack sufficient 
knowledge of the causes and pathways of fatigue in RA. It is not yet clear how  
199 inflammatory processes influence fatigue. Even if b iotherapies have effect on these 
inflammatory processes, fatigue can remain because it is also linked to psychological 
processes. A second explanation is related to the m easurement of fatigue. When we are 
not able to measure fatigue appropriately, we canno t evaluate intervention effects on 
fatigue adequately. The problems related to the mea surement of fatigue were discussed 
in detail also in the following chapters.   
  
The central question of Chapter 4 is how patients with RA experience fatigue. In dept h-
interviews were conducted to systematically describ e the experience of fatigue in patients 
with all levels of fatigue. 3 Experiences of fatigue were compared between group s of 
patients (as men vs. women and younger vs. older pa tients). As documented in previous 
studies, fatigue was experienced as multidimensiona l, annoying symptom with far-
reaching consequences. However, our study also reve aled inter- and intra-individual 
differences: emotions, consequences and management of fatigue differed with age and 
gender. Some of these differences were related to t he number of daily roles that patients 
had to fulfil. Especially younger women with multip le daily roles were vulnerable to the 
negative impact of fatigue. Many patients reported variation in severity, frequency and 
duration of fatigue, with some even reporting diffe rent forms of fatigue. Patients also 
mentioned positive aspects of fatigue. In this qual itative study we described the meaning 
of fatigue. In the next step we investigated whethe r there are certain groups of patients 
who experience fatigue in a different way, and whic h patient characteristics are related to 
such different patterns. 
 
As described in chapter 5, we used Q-methodology to find patterns of fatigue e xperience 
shared by a certain group of patients. 4 Statements about fatigue were sorted by the 
participants to reflect their agreement with the st atements. Person factor analysis was 
performed on the Q-sorts to factor patients across items (instead of items across persons 
as in usual factor analysis). Each factor represent ed a group of patients with a common 
perspective on the experience of fatigue. Physical,  psychological and social characteristics 
of patients were associated with those experiences.  The groups identified were labelled 
as: “Little impact of fatigue”, “Good coping and ba d sleep”, “Search for balance”, and 
“High distress”. This analysis provided insight int o different perspectives of the experience 
of fatigue in groups of patients who share certain characteristics. The study showed large 
inter-individual differences in the experience of f atigue in RA; not all patients really 
suffered from fatigue, but for many RA patients fat igue was an important and not treated 
complaint. Moreover, disease activity seemed to be less important in relation to fatigue 
than daily roles and tasks, what underlines the imp ortance of social aspects for the 200 experience of fatigue. The Q-sort study provided fu rther information on the different 
dimensions of fatigue that are important for RA pat ients; and also on the importance of 
the individual items to assess certain dimensions. 
 
In  chapter 6, 7 and 8  the development and qualitative evaluation of the item pool for the 
comprehensive assessment of fatigue in RA is report ed. In  chapter 6, the process of the 
selection of items for the CAT fatigue RA by using a Delphi approach, is described in 
detail. 5  For the development of a CAT, a calibrated item b ank is needed. Therefore a 
comprehensive pool of potential items was developed  to cover all dimensions of fatigue 
experience. All translated items of the BRAF-MDQ an d all items from those questionnaires 
with reasonable validity in RA were included. Addit ional items were constructed based on 
other questionnaires and material from the intervie ws and the Q-sort study. In a Delphi 
procedure, rheumatologists, nurses and patients wer e asked to judge the selected 
dimensions and items for relevancy. They were also invited to nominate other dimensions 
of fatigue and items to be included in a comprehens ive measure of fatigue. These experts 
could also indicate if items reflected other aspect s of RA (e.g. items confounded with 
disability or inflammation) and should therefore no t be included. Items were selected for 
the development of the item bank according to a des cribed decision rule. Remaining items 
were adjusted based on participants´ comments and r e-evaluated in a second round. The 
procedure stopped when all items were selected or r ejected. Items were excluded due to 
unclear or too extreme formulations or because they  overlapped with other aspects than 
fatigue (e.g. disability). After two rounds 245 ite ms, spread among 12 dimensions, were 
selected. Many excluded items originated form inter view material, indicating that 
patients´ stories are not enough to construct good items and further evaluation such as a 
Delphi study is definitely needed. The Delphi proce dure turned out to be a beneficial 
approach to select items for measuring fatigue in R A. Nevertheless, a bottleneck was that 
patients and professionals tended to evaluate some items in a normative way. In 
conclusion, the study revealed a qualitatively eval uated pool of potential items for the 
item bank development.  
Chapter 7 focuses on the question which dimensions of fatigue  should be used for a 
comprehensive measurement of fatigue in RA. 6 The experts evaluated our dimensions for 
the multi-dimensional assessment of fatigue in RA a s adequate. All of the 12 proposed 
dimensions were rated as relevant by the participan ts; severity, frequency, duration, 
changes in fatigue, perceived causes of fatigue, en ergy, sleep/rest, body feeling, 
cognition/concentration, coping, negative emotions/ mood, and consequences. No 
additional dimensions emerged from the participants ’ comments, suggesting that our item 
pool satisfactory covers the phenomenon of fatigue in RA.  
201 Results also provided insight into the content vali dity of items of frequently used 
traditional questionnaires (SF-36 subscale vitality , FACIT-F, POMS subscale fatigue/inertia, 
MAF) and the BRAF-MDQ as reported in chapter 8 .7 Only 40% of the items from traditional 
questionnaires were clear and adequate in their ori ginal style. However, most of the other 
items could be selected after adaptations and were included in our item pool.  
 
Chapter 9 describes the calibration of the previously evaluat ed, face and content valid 
item pool to measure fatigue in RA. 8 The fit of the items with the underlying dimension s 
was assessed with item response theory (IRT) and th e dimensional structure of the item 
pool was examined by factor analysis. It was not fe asible to let each patient fill in all 245 
items of the item pool, so we used an item administ ration design to construct seven 
different questionnaire versions. 551 patients with  RA filled in one of those versions. IRT 
analysis using the generalized partial credit model  (GPCM) was conducted for each 
dimension of fatigue. Thereby 49 items showed insuf ficient item characteristics (poor 
discriminative ability and/or model misfit) and wer e removed. Exploratory and 
confirmatory factor analysis on the 196 remaining i tems revealed three dimensions of 
fatigue: severity, impact and variability of fatigu e. This study provided an initially 
calibrated multidimensional item bank and has shown  which dimensions and items that 
came forward from previous studies are important fo r the development of a 
multidimensional CAT for fatigue in RA.   
 
 
General discussion and future directions 
 
This thesis provides insights into the meaning of f atigue in RA and offers an initially 
calibrated, multidimensional item pool to measure f atigue in patients with RA. For its 
development, several steps were undertaken to ensur e the inclusion of the perspective of 
patients and also the view of professionals.  
 
From patient perspective to measurement 
Knowledge about causal relationships between fatigu e and other variables did not exist 
when we started this project. We summarized variabl es that might have a potential causal 
relation with fatigue in RA, but hardly conclusions  about causes and consequences could 
be drawn due to the cross-sectional nature of the r eviewed studies. It is even unclear 
whether there are significant relations between fat igue and inflammatory processes in RA. 
This lack of information underlines the relevance f or understanding fatigue from the 
patients´ perspective. As so little is known about a subjective phenomenon, the 202 experience of patients is the logical starting poin t for further studies. What patients tell us 
about their perspective on fatigue can inform the d evelopment of further research 
questions. Besides this, a precondition for the exa mination of the complex of causes and 
consequences of fatigue is appropriate measurement.    
This thesis is characterized by the intention to co mbine the perspective of patients with 
advanced statistical methods. Both approaches were used for the development of an item 
pool to measure fatigue in RA.  
Especially in the calibration study of the qualitat ively evaluated item pool (chapter 9), it 
was a challenge to balance information from the pat ient perspective and results from 
statistical analyses. In our case, the dimension “v ariability of fatigue” had poorer statistical 
outcomes than the other two dimensions. However, th is variability of fatigue was clearly 
brought up by patients. In this dilemma, a possibil ity could be to save this important 
aspect of the patient perspective by giving this di mension a prominent place in the CAT. It 
is possible to place restrictions on the mechanisms  of the CAT in its future development so 
that items from this dimension will be chosen (and provided to patients) in the 
measurement procedure although other items might ha ve somewhat better item 
characteristics and would therefore be selected wit h a higher likelihood. Another option 
would be to use a short traditional questionnaire w ith questions about the variability of 
fatigue or to ask about this aspect of fatigue expe rience in the consultations with the 
rheumatologist or other health professional. Nevert heless, the tension between 
incorporating the patients´ perspective and statist ical analyses will remain in all attempts 
of patient centred research. Modern psychometric me thods as IRT include the danger of 
losing face validity of items and the danger of exc luding items although they are needed 
for an adequate reflection of the measured construc t.9 However, it has to be noted that 
the calibration study statistically supported the m ultidimensionality of fatigue as reported 
by patients.  
Including the patients´ perspective into research i s a hot topic at the moment. 9,10 At first 
glance it seems simple but patient perspective and statistics are about different 
philosophies. The perspective of patients alone is not enough and only measurement 
statistic is not enough too. One without the other makes no sense, but one with another is 
not perfect either. When experts develop measuremen t instruments, the patient 
perspective is missing. However, it is difficult to  translate the perspective of patients into a 
good scale. In this thesis, each study was thorough ly conducted. Several logical steps were 
undertaken to develop the item pool, but there was still space for interpretation of the 
authors between the separate studies. 11  The translation between different methods is not 
always easy and possibly by applying statistical me thods, a part of the patients’  
203 perspective gets lost again. There are no guideline s how to come from interviews to items 
or according to what criteria expert evaluations sh ould be included.  
Measurement of fatigue in RA, even as science in it self, is an iterative process. There will 
never be the final solution. Further validation wil l take place to check whether items 
adequately cover everything patients reported. Adap tation to new circumstances is 
needed since science comes up with new insights and  societies are changing, e.g. by aging 
populations. Over and over again, new medication is  developed that possibly will influence 
the manifestation of fatigue in RA. These developme nts and changes may make it 
necessary to adjust measurement instruments accordi ngly. At least it reminds us that the 
validation of measurement instruments for fatigue s hould be re-checked and updated 
regularly. 
 
 
Limitations of the thesis  
The strength of our approach to develop the item po ol is the thorough process from 
patients´ experience to measurement. Nevertheless, there are some limitations of this 
thesis.  
First, the aim of the systematic review (chapter 2)  could not be reached in a satisfactory 
way. We intended to gain more insight into possible  causes and consequences of fatigue 
in RA by investigating what is reported about possi ble causes of fatigue in RA, what is 
reported about possible consequences of fatigue in RA and what is reported about 
differences in the level of fatigue between differe nt groups, e.g. different diagnoses, 
patients and healthy controls. We provided an overv iew about variables that were 
associated with fatigue in RA and potential causal relations. However, most of the 
reviewed studies were cross-sectional and did not a llow direct conclusions about causal 
relationships.  
Second, we conducted a broad and detailed Delphi st udy (chapter 6-8) and although this 
was the best approach for our purposes, it had some  bottlenecks. It was very time 
consuming for participants and researchers and it t urned out that participants tended to 
evaluate some items in a normative way. Possibly, i tems were evaluated as not 
appropriate because participants thought that an it em was too confronting or that 
patients gave in fact an answer to the item, reflec ting their own fatigue. Cognitive 
interviews would have been a possibility to gain mo re clarity about this aspect, but the 
item pool contained far too many items for applying  cognitive interviews. Many items are 
needed for an item bank to represent the whole meas urement range. For the same 
reason, we started as heterogeneous as possible, in cluding many items and taking into 
account that some items would be excluded in the De lphi process. In the final 204 construction of the CAT, we will include cognitive interviews with patients as final check 
for adequate formulation of the items. An important  advantage of the Delphi study, 
compared to cognitive interviews with patients, was  however that also the opinions of 
nurses and rheumatologists were included. The view of professionals is also essential 
because they have to accept and use measurement ins truments for fatigue.  
Excluded items came from both sources; from intervi ew material and also from existing 
questionnaires. However, the larger number was from  interview material. It was a special 
challenge in the development of the item pool to en d up with appropriate items that we 
developed from our interview material as no guideli nes for the process of constructing 
items from interview material are available at all.    
Another limitation of the results presented in this  thesis lies in the sample size of the 
calibration study (chapter 9). For our purposes and  the item administration design the 
number of participants was rather small. For IRT an alysis usually larger samples are 
advised. Therefore the results of the calibration s tudy have to be regarded as preliminary 
results. In the consecutive project about the furth er development of the CAT fatigue, 
more data will be gained and consecutive analyses w ill be carried out. Our current item 
pool is a valuable starting point for this future p roject.  
When comparing the three dimensions of our initial item pool (severity, impact, variability 
of fatigue) with the other fatigue instrument that has been developed from the 
perspective of patients with RA, the BRAF-MDQ, 12  it turns out that the BRAF-MDQ has 
different dimensions. Physical fatigue, impact of f atigue on daily living, cognitions and 
emotions related to fatigue are aspects that are al so included in our item pool, but did not 
come forward from factor analysis in the same way a s in the BRAF. With the CAT we intent 
to develop, it will be possible to measure fatigue more precisely and with few items. 
However, when choosing a measurement instrument for  fatigue, it is important to bear in 
mind what is aimed to achieve. For a profile of fat igue in an individual patient, probably 
the BRAF-MDQ is the more appropriate choice as it s hows on which area the 
consequences of fatigue are experienced. For effici ent measurement in daily clinical 
practice and in trials the CAT would be the more fa vourable instrument to assess fatigue 
multidimensional and more precise.  
 
 
Future directions 
As pointed out in the introduction, it is not yet u nderstood whether the experience of 
fatigue in RA is different from other diseases. In many other diseases as MS and cancer, 
fatigue is one of the main symptoms either. However  it might be caused by different 
processes. Given the absence of evidence for a gene ral, universal fatigue experience  
205 across different chronic, physical conditions, we a ssume that it is reasonable to develop a 
fatigue CAT, which is specific for RA.   
It has to be examined in the future how fatigue in RA overlaps with fatigue in other 
diseases. A first step would be a systematic compar ison of qualitative research on the 
experience of fatigue in different rheumatic condit ions and other diseases.  
Furthermore knowledge about causes and consequences  of fatigue in RA is urgently 
needed. For the investigation of causality, studies  are required that use an adequate 
design.  Prospective, longitudinal approaches inclu ding control for baseline levels of 
fatigue would be a good starting point. 
With more insight about the causal pathways of fati gue in RA, it could be compared with 
those of other diseases. Not until then, it will be  possible to make a clear statement about 
the question whether a specific measurement instrum ent for fatigue in RA is needed. 
Possibly the CAT can be validated for other (rheuma tic) conditions in the future.  
Independent of the discussion about a need for dise ase specific measurement 
instruments, it would also be valuable to validate the CAT in different countries.  
 
In sum, this thesis gained more insight into what f atigue in RA is. By now it is clear that 
many patients experience fatigue in RA as different  from usual fatigue. We know that 
fatigue has a multidimensional character. Several s tudies come to relatively consistent 
results regarding those dimensions. Moreover resear ch has provided ideas about potential 
factors associated with fatigue in RA and where to search for its causes and pathways. 
Future studies have to provide more evidence for th ose. Furthermore, it has to be found 
out how fatigue in RA can be treated or even preven ted. Research is needed to show how 
patient-education can be provided and how patients having serious problems with fatigue 
can be adequately supported. Therefore a good measu rement instrument is needed. This 
thesis adds an additional step in this challenging task and provides the thoroughly 
developed basis for the consecutive construction of  a CAT for fatigue in RA.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 206 REFERENCES 
 
1. Nikolaus S, Bode C, Taal E, vd Laar MAFJ (in pre paration for submission). Fatigue and 
factors related to fatigue in rheumatoid arhritis: a systematic review.  
2. Nikolaus S, van de Laar MAFJ. Measuring fatigue in rheumatoid arthritis. Nat Rev 
Rheumatol 2011 Aug 30;7:562-4. 
3. Nikolaus S, Bode C, Taal E, van de Laar MAFJ. Ne w insights into the experience of fatigue 
among patients with rheumatoid arthritis: A qualita tive study. Ann Rheum Dis 2010;69(5), 
895–897.  
4. Nikolaus S, Bode C, Taal E, van de Laar MAFJ. Fo ur different patterns of fatigue in 
rheumatoid arthritis patients: results of a Q-sort study. Rheumatology 2010;49(11), 2191-
2199. 
5. Nikolaus S, Bode C, Taal E, van de Laar MAFJ. Se lection of items for a computer-adaptive 
test to measure fatigue in patients with rheumatoid  arthritis – A Delphi approach. Qual 
Life Res. Published online 31 July 2011. doi: 10.10 07/s11136-011-9982-8 
6. Nikolaus S, Bode C, Taal E, van de Laar MAFJ. Wh ich dimensions of fatigue should be 
measured in patients with rheumatoid arthritis? – A  Delphi study. Musculoskeletal Care. 
Published online 11 November 2011. doi: 10.1002/msc .222 
7. Nikolaus S, Bode C, Taal E, van de Laar MAFJ (in  press). Experts’ evaluations of fatigue 
questionnaires used in rheumatoid arthritis – A Del phi study among patients, nurses and 
rheumatologists in the Netherlands. Clin Exp Rheuma tol. 
8. Nikolaus S, Bode C, Taal E, van de Laar MAFJ (in  preparation for submission). Calibration 
of a multidimensional item bank to measure fatigue in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. 
9. Fries JF. New instruments for assessing disabili ty: not quite ready for prime time. 
Arthritis Rheum 2004;50:3064-3067. 
10. Quest E et al. Patient perspective. J Rheumatol  2003;30:884-885. 
11. Bode, C. Qualitative interviews and IRT for dev eloping PRO fatigue. Paper presented at 
the Annual Meeting of the American College for Rheu matology 5-9 november 2011, 
Chicago.  
12. Nicklin J, Cramp F, Kirwan J, Greenwood R, Urba n M, Hewlett S. Measuring fatigue in 
rheumatoid arthritis: A cross-sectional study to ev aluate the Bristol Rheumatoid Arthritis 
Fatigue Multi-Dimensional questionnaire, visual ana logue scales, and numerical rating 
scales. Arthritis Care Res 2010;62:1559-1568. 
 
 
 
  
207  
 
 
 
Samenvatting 
(Dutch summary) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 208 De inhoud van dit proefschrift brengt de betekenis van vermoeidheid bij RA in kaart vanuit 
het patiënten perspectief en levert een gekalibreer de multidimensionele itembank op.  
In het kort gezegd houdt het proefschrift de volgen de studies in. 
Ten eerste hebben wij een systematische review naar  statistische voorspellers van 
vermoeidheid en de invloed van vermoeidheid op ande re uitkomstmaten uitgevoerd. 
Daarna werden de moeilijkheden van het meten van be handeleffecten op vermoeidheid 
bij RA bediscussieerd. 
Ten tweede hebben wij een item pool voor het meten van vermoeidheid bij RA ontwikkeld 
door middel van vier op elkaar volgende studies (in terview studie, Q-sort studie, Delphi 
studie en kalibratiestudie). De volgorde van deze s tudies had een logische opbouw; we zijn 
begonnen met kwalitatief onderzoek naar de ervaring  van patiënten en zijn geëindigd met 
een statistisch gekalibreerde itempool. Deze zullen  wij verder gebruiken om een computer 
adaptieve test (CAT) voor vermoeidheid bij RA te co nstrueren.  Hieronder worden de 
studies kort samengevat.  
 
Het eerste artikel in het proefschrift ( hoofdstuk 2 ) geeft een overzicht over de actuele 
stand van zaken wat betreft onderzoek naar mogelijk e oorzaken en consequenties van 
vermoeidheid bij RA. Daarnaast hebben wij verschill en en overeenkomsten in 
vermoeidheid tussen patiënten met verschillende dia gnoses beschreven. Studies toonden 
voorspellers aan voor vermoeidheid onder ziekte ger elateerde aspecten (bijv. pijn), fysiek 
functioneren (bijv. lichamelijke beperkingen), cogn itief/emotioneel functioneren (bijv. 
depressie) en sociale aspecten (bijv. negatieve int erpersoonlijke gebeurtenissen). Bij 
vrouwen werden over het algemeen hogere vermoeidhei dsniveaus gevonden dan bij 
mannen. Met betrekking tot de relatie tussen ontste kingsactiviteit (bijv. BSE of/en DAS28) 
en vermoeidheid bij RA kwamen tegenstrijdige result aten naar voren. Een hogere mate 
van vermoeidheid was geassocieerd met ziektegerelat eerde aspecten (bijv. 
ochtendstijfheid), fysiek functioneren (bijv. fysie ke kwaliteit van leven), 
cognitieve/emotionele aspecten (bijv. psychologisch e stress) en sociale aspecten (bijv. 
werkvermogen). Patiënten met RA rapporteerden een h ogere mate van vermoeidheid dan 
gezonde mensen. Fibromyalgie patiënten daarentegen rapporteerden een hogere mate 
van vermoeidheid dan andere patiëntengroepen. Het v iel op dat de meeste aanwijzingen 
voor een relatie tussen vermoeidheid en andere vari abelen gevonden werden voor pijn, 
depressie en fysiek functioneren. In veel van de cr oss-sectionele en ook van de 
longitudinale studies bleken deze drie variabelen e en belangrijke rol te spelen bij het 
voorspellen van vermoeidheid bij RA.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Hoewel verschillende associaties tussen vermoeidhei d en andere variabelen gevonden 
werden, konden wij op basis van de gereviewde liter atuur nauwelijks betrouwbare  
209 conclusies over causaliteit trekken. Het merendeel van de studies was cross-sectioneel en 
niet alle longitudinale studies controleerden voor vermoeidheid op baseline. Prospectief 
longitudinaal onderzoek met adequate statistische a nalyses is nodig om meer over de 
multicausale relaties tussen vermoeidheid bij RA en  andere variabelen aan te tonen.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
 
Hoofdstuk 3 bediscussieert de teleurstellende effecten van biot herapieën op 
vermoeidheid bij RA zoals aangetoond door een recen te meta-analyse. Om deze 
resultaten te verklaren hebben wij twee scenario’s geschetst. Het eerste scenario 
suggereert dat biotherapieën niet effectief zijn vo or het verminderen van vermoeidheid 
bij RA. We weten nog niet genoeg over de oorzaken e n consequenties van vermoeidheid 
bij RA. Het is nog niet duidelijk hoe vermoeidheid door ontstekingsprocessen beïnvloed 
wordt. Zelfs als biotherapie effect op vermoeidheid  heeft, kan vermoeidheid blijven 
bestaan omdat deze ook gerelateerd is aan psycholog ische processen. Het tweede 
scenario gaat over het meten van vermoeidheid. Als we niet in staat zijn vermoeidheid 
adequaat te meten, kunnen we interventie-effecten o p vermoeidheid ook niet goed 
evalueren. De problemen rondom het meten van vermoe idheid worden ook in de 
volgende hoofdstukken besproken.   
 
De centrale vraag van hoofdstuk 4 is hoe patiënten met RA vermoeidheid ervaren. We 
hebben diepte-interviews uitgevoerd om de ervaring van vermoeidheid van patiënten met 
verschillende niveaus van vermoeidheid systematisch  te beschrijven. Daarbij hebben wij 
ook ervaringen van vermoeidheid vergeleken tussen g roepen van patiënten (mannen vs. 
vrouwen en jongere vs. oudere patiënten). Zoals ger apporteerd in voorafgaande studies, 
werd vermoeidheid ervaren als een multidimensioneel , lastig symptoom met verreikende 
consequenties. Niettemin liet onze studie ook inter - en intra-individuele verschillen zien: 
emoties, consequenties en omgang met vermoeidheid v arieerden voor leeftijd en 
geslacht. Sommige van deze verschillen waren gerela teerd aan het aantal dagelijkse rollen 
van patiënten. Vooral jongere vrouwen met meerdere dagelijkse rollen waren kwetsbaar 
voor de negatieve invloed van vermoeidheid. Veel pa tiënten rapporteerden variaties in 
ernst, frequentie en duur van vermoeidheid, waarbij  sommigen zelfs verschillende vormen 
van vermoeidheid rapporteerden. Een interessant res ultaat was dat patiënten ook 
positieve aspecten van vermoeidheid noemden, bijvoo rbeeld bewustere keuzes in het 
leven maken en leren de (gedwongen) rust te waarder en. Na de betekenis van 
vermoeidheid te hebben beschreven, wilden wij onder zoeken of er bepaalde groepen van 
patiënten bestaan die vermoeidheid op een vergelijk bare manier ervaren en welke 
kenmerken deze groepen gemeen hebben.  
 210 In hoofdstuk 5 wordt beschreven hoe we Q-methodologie gebruikt heb ben om patronen 
in de ervaring van vermoeidheid bij RA te vinden. D eelnemers hebben stellingen over 
vermoeidheid gesorteerd om aan te geven in hoeverre  ze op hen van toepassing waren. 
Met behulp van personen-factoranalyse op de Q-sorts  hebben wij patiënten over items 
verdeeld (in plaats van items over personen zoals i n gebruikelijke factoranalyse). Elke 
factor stond voor een groep van patiënten met een v ergelijkbaar perspectief op de 
ervaring van vermoeidheid. Fysieke, psychologische en sociale kenmerken van patiënten 
leken met deze ervaringen samen te hangen. We hebbe n de groepen benoemd als: 
“Weinig invloed van vermoeidheid”, “Goede omgang en  slechte slaap”, “Zoek naar 
balans”, en “Veel distress”. Deze analyse gaf inzic ht in verschillende perspectieven op de 
ervaring van vermoeidheid in groepen van patiënten en welke kenmerken deze 
patiëntengroepen gemeen hebben. De studie liet grot e inter-individuele verschillen zien in 
de ervaring van vermoeidheid bij RA; niet alle pati ënten hadden last van vermoeidheid, 
maar voor veel RA-patiënten was vermoeidheid een be langrijk en een (nog) niet 
behandelde klacht. Bovendien bleek ziekteactiviteit  minder belangrijk in relatie tot 
vermoeidheid dan dagelijkse rollen en taken, wat de  relevantie van sociale aspecten voor 
de ervaring van vermoeidheid onderstreept. De Q-sor t studie leverde ook informatie op 
over welke dimensies van vermoeidheid belangrijk zi jn voor RA-patiënten en hoe goed 
individuele items deze dimensies meten. 
 
Hoofdstuk 6, 7 en 8 gaan over onze aansluitende Delphi-studie waarin wi j aan experts 
(patiënten, verpleegkundigen/reumaconsulenten en re umatologen) gevraagd hebben om 
items voor het meten van vermoeidheid op hun geschi ktheid te beoordelen.  
Voor de constructie van een CAT is een gekalibreerd e itembank nodig. Om een dergelijk 
itembank voor het uitgebreid kunnen meten van vermo eidheid bij RA te ontwikkelen, 
hebben wij een omvangrijke verzameling van potentië le items gemaakt om alle dimensies 
van de vermoeidheidservaring mee te nemen. Alle ver taalde items van de BRAF-MDQ en 
alle items van de vragenlijsten met acceptabele val iditeit voor RA werden geïncludeerd. 
We hebben ook aanvullende items geconstrueerd vanui t ons interviewmateriaal en op 
basis van de Q-sort studie en andere vragenlijsten.  In hoofdstuk 6 wordt het proces van de 
selectie van items voor de CAT gedetailleerd beschr even. Voor de inhoudelijke evaluatie 
van onze verzameling van potentiële vermoeidheidsit ems wilden wij zowel het perspectief 
van patiënten als ook het perspectief van professio nals meenemen. Daarom hebben wij in 
een Delphi-procedure aan reumatologen, verpleegkund igen/reumaconsulenten en 
patiënten gevraagd om de geselecteerde items en dim ensies op relevantie te beoordelen. 
Deze experts werden ook uitgenodigd om andere dimen sies van vermoeidheid en items te 
nomineren om mee te nemen in een omvangrijke meting  van vermoeidheid. Zij konden  
211 ook aangeven dat items andere aspecten van RA weerg aven (bijv. items die mogelijk 
beperkingen of ontstekingen reflecteerden) en daaro m niet meegenomen zouden moeten 
worden. We hebben gebruik gemaakt van een vooraf be schreven beslisregel om items 
voor de ontwikkeling van de itembank te selecteren.  De overige items hebben wij 
aangepast op basis van de commentaren van de deelne mers en in een tweede ronde ter 
herbeoordeling aangeboden. De procedure eindigde al s alle items geselecteerd of 
geëxcludeerd waren. Redenen voor exclusie waren ond uidelijke of te extreme 
formuleringen of overlap met andere aspecten dan ve rmoeidheid (bijv. lichamelijke 
beperkingen). Na twee rondes konden wij 245 items s electeren die verdeeld waren over 
12 dimensies. De studie leverde een kwalitatief geë valueerde itempool op met potentiële 
items voor de ontwikkeling van de itembank.   
De focus van  hoofdstuk 7 ligt op de vraag welke dimensies van vermoeidheid g ebruikt 
zouden moeten worden voor een uitgebreide meting va n vermoeidheid bij RA. De experts 
vonden onze dimensies voor het multidimensioneel me ten van vermoeidheid bij RA 
geschikt. Alle van de 12 voorgestelde dimensies wer den door de deelnemers als relevant 
beoordeeld; ernst, frequentie, duur, verandering in  vermoeidheid, ervaren oorzaken van 
vermoeidheid, energie, slaap/rust, lichaamsgevoel, cognitie/concentratie, omgang, 
negatieve emoties/stemming en consequenties. Er kwa men geen aanvullende dimensies 
uit de commentaren van de deelnemers naar voren, wa t erop duidt dat ons itempool het 
fenomeen van vermoeidheid in RA goed afdekt.  
De resultaten gaven ook inzicht in de inhoudsvalidi teit van items uit frequent gebruikte 
traditionele vragenlijsten (SF-36 subschaal vitalit eit, FACIT-F, POMS subschaal fatigue 
/inertia, MAF) en de BRAF-MDQ zoals gerapporteerd i n hoofdstuk 8 . Slechts 40% van de 
items van traditionele vragenlijsten was duidelijk en adequaat in hun oorspronkelijke 
vorm. Echter, de meeste van de overige items werden  na aanpassing geselecteerd en 
konden in ons itempool worden opgenomen.   
 
Hoofdstuk 9 beschrijft de kalibratie van de voorafgaande geëval ueerde, face- en 
inhoudsvalide itempool voor het meten van vermoeidh eid bij RA. We hebben de itemfit 
met de onderliggende dimensies geëvalueerd door mid del van item response theorie (IRT) 
en de dimensionele structuur van de itempool onderz ocht met factoranalyse. Het was niet 
mogelijk dat elke patiënt alle 245 items van de ite mpool invulde. Daarom hebben wij een 
item-afnameschema ontwikkeld om zeven verschillende  vragenlijstversies te construeren. 
Daarbij hebben wij gelet op voldoende overlap tusse n de versies voor de analyses. 
Vervolgens vulden 551 patiënten met RA een van deze  versies in. Met behulp van IRT 
hebben wij de data voor elke dimensie van vermoeidh eid geanalyseerd. Daarvoor hebben 
wij gebruik gemaakt van het generalized partial cre dit model (GPCM). Het bleek dat 49 212 items onvoldoende itemkarakteristieken hadden (slec ht discriminatief vermogen en/of 
model misfit). Deze items hebben wij voor de verder e analyse van de itempool verwijderd. 
Exploratieve en confirmatorische factoranalyse van de 196 overige items brachten drie 
dimensies naar voren: ernst, impact en variabilitei t van vermoeidheid. Deze studie leverde 
een voorlopig gekalibreerde multidimensionele itemb ank op en liet zien welke dimensies 
en items, die naar voren waren gekomen uit voorafga ande studies, belangrijk zijn voor de 
ontwikkeling van een multidimensionele CAT voor ver moeidheid bij RA.   
 
 
Dit proefschrift verschaft inzichten in de betekeni s van vermoeidheid bij RA en levert een 
voorlopig gekalibreerde, multidimensionele itempool  op voor het meten van 
vermoeidheid bij patiënten met RA. Voor zijn ontwik keling hebben wij verschillende 
stappen uitgevoerd om ervoor te zorgen dat zowel he t perspectief van patiënten als de 
zienswijze van professionals meegenomen werd.   
In de discussie gaan we in op de spanning die tusse n de inclusie van het 
patiëntenperspectief en statistische analyses kan o ptreden. Moderne psychometrische 
methoden zoals IRT lopen het risico face-validiteit  van items te verliezen en items te 
excluderen terwijl deze nodig zijn voor een adequat e weerspiegeling van het te meten 
construct. Op het eerste gezicht lijkt het eenvoudi g het patiëntenperspectief mee te 
nemen, maar de statistische benadering daarvan is n ogal lastig. In de ontwikkeling van ons 
itempool hebben wij verschillende logisch-op-elkaar -volgende stappen ondernomen om 
het patiëntenperspectief te includeren. Echter, tus sen de verschillende studies was ruimte 
voor interpretatie door de onderzoekers. De vertali ng tussen verschillende methoden is 
niet altijd gemakkelijk en mogelijkerwijs gaat het patiëntenperspectief deels verloren als 
statistische methoden worden toegepast.   
We bediscussiëren ook dat het meten van vermoeidhei d bij RA, net als wetenschap zelf, 
een iteratief proces is. Verdere validatie zal nodi g zijn om te kijken of items alle aspecten 
afdekken die door patiënten gerapporteerd zijn. Bov endien zullen nieuwe 
wetenschappelijke inzichten en maatschappelijke ver anderingen eisen dat de validatie van 
meetinstrumenten voor vermoeidheid regelmatig herha ald wordt om de nodige 
aanpassingen uit te voeren.  
Daarnaast gaan we in op de beperkingen van het proe fschrift. Hoofdstuk 2 geeft een 
overzicht van variabelen die met vermoeidheid bij R A samenhangen en van potentiële 
causale relaties. Echter, de meeste van de gereview de studies waren cross-sectioneel en 
laten geen directe conclusie over causale relaties toe. De Delphi-studie, zoals beschreven 
in hoofdstuk 6 t/m 8,was zorgvuldig uitgevoerd en h oewel het een goede methode voor 
ons doeleinden was, kwamen we een paar knelpunten t egen. De studie kostte veel tijd  
213 voor deelnemers en onderzoekers en het bleek dat de elnemers de neiging hadden om 
sommige items op een normatieve manier te beoordele n. Geëxcludeerde items kwamen 
uit interviewmateriaal en uit bestaande vragenlijst en, maar het grootste aantal items was 
afkomstig uit het interviewmateriaal. Het is een gr ote uitdaging om geschikte items vanuit 
interviewmateriaal te ontwikkelen, omdat er geen ri chtlijnen voor dit proces bestaan. Een 
andere beperking van de resultaten die in dit proef schrift gepresenteerd worden, is de 
relatief kleine steekproef van de kalibratiestudie (hoofdstuk 9). De bevindingen van deze 
studie moeten als voorlopige resultaten beschouwd w orden. In het aansluitende project 
over de verdere ontwikkeling van de CAT-vermoeidhei d zullen we meer data verzamelen 
en verdere analyses uitvoeren. In de discussie verg elijken wij bovendien de dimensies van 
ons voorlopige itempool met de dimensies van het an dere meetinstrument voor 
vermoeidheid bij RA dat werd ontwikkeld vanuit het patiëntenperspectief, de BRAF-MDQ. 
We gaan daarbij in op doeleinden waarvoor de twee i nstrumenten het meest geschikt zijn.  
Afsluitend bediscussiëren wij mogelijke richtingen voor toekomstig onderzoek. Het is nog 
onduidelijk in hoeverre vermoeidheid bij RA overlap  vertoont met vermoeidheid bij 
andere ziektes. Bovendien is dringend meer kennis n odig over oorzaken en consequenties 
van vermoeidheid bij RA. Pas met meer inzicht in de  etiologie van vermoeidheid zal het 
mogelijk zijn de vraag te beantwoorden of het nodig  is een specifiek meetinstrument voor 
RA te gebruiken. Mogelijk kan de CAT in de toekomst  gevalideerd worden voor andere 
(reumatische) aandoeningen. Verder is het waardevol  om de CAT in verschillende landen 
te valideren.  
De bevindingen in dit proefschrift hebben meer inzi cht gegeven in de betekenis van 
vermoeidheid voor RA. Het is duidelijk dat veel pat iënten met RA vermoeidheid als 
onvoorspelbaar en meer extreem ervaren dan gewone v ermoeidheid. Bovendien is 
bekend dat vermoeidheid een multidimensioneel karak ter heeft. Onderzoek heeft ideeën 
naar voren gebracht over potentiële factoren die me t vermoeidheid bij RA geassocieerd 
zijn. Het is duidelijk geworden op welke oorzakelij ke factoren toekomstig onderzoek 
gericht moet zijn. Verder is het belangrijk dat er onderzoek gedaan wordt naar de manier 
waarop vermoeidheid behandeld of zelfs voorkomen ka n worden. Daarvoor is een goed 
meetinstrument nodig. De resultaten in dit proefsch rift voegen een stap toe aan deze 
uitdagende taak en bieden een degelijke basis voor de constructie van een CAT voor het 
meten van vermoeidheid bij RA.    
 
 
 
 
 214  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
215  
 
 
 
Dankwoord 
 (Acknowledgements) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 216 Promoveren in je eentje is niet mogelijk. Los daarv an zou het ook niet leuk zijn. Daarom 
ben ik blij dat er veel mensen zijn die me de afgel open vier jaar begeleid hebben. Ik wil 
iedereen danken die me tijdens mijn promotietraject  ondersteund heeft. Sommige 
mensen wil ik hier in het bijzonder noemen. 
Ten eerste gaat mijn dank uit naar de patiënten die  aan mijn studies hebben meegewerkt. 
Zonder hun participatie was dit proefschrift niet t ot stand gekomen. Het was erg fijn dat ik 
steeds beroep kon doen op het Patiëntenforum Reuma Research Partners. Ik heb het zeer 
gewaardeerd dat mensen zo bereidwillig waren vragen  over vermoeidheid te 
beantwoorden terwijl het veel van hun tijd en energ ie gekost moet hebben. Ook de 
feedback en  ondersteuning van patiënten op studiem iddagen waren belangrijk voor mij 
omdat ik daardoor mocht ervaren hoe relevant mijn w erk voor mensen is.  
Ik had het plezier meerdere begeleiders te hebben; Prof.dr. Mart van de Laar, Dr. Erik Taal 
en Dr. Christina Bode.  
Mart, hartelijk dank voor je vertrouwen in mij. Jou w interesse in mijn project, je positieve 
zienswijze en betrokkenheid heb ik als prettig erva ren. Ook bedankt voor de vrijheid die je 
me hebt gegeven en in de toekomst wilt geven. Ik we et dat dit niet vanzelfsprekend is. 
Erik, het was erg fijn jou als begeleider te hebben . Jouw rustige en nauwkeurige manier en 
je scherpe blik hebben tot verbeteringen in mijn we rk geleid. Ik mocht altijd bij je 
binnenlopen en je hebt steeds met me meegedacht. Be dankt! 
Christina, jij was mijn dagelijkse begeleider en da ar ben ik ontzettend blij mee. Je hebt me 
altijd het gevoel gegeven dat je deur voor mij open  staat en ik kon altijd op je rekenen. 
Tijdens de afgelopen vier jaar heb je me uitdaginge n gegeven maar je hebt er ook voor 
gezorgd dat ik niet te veel hooi op mijn vork zou n emen. Bedankt dat je zo´n betrokken 
begeleider was! Je bent een enthousiast en inspirer end iemand waarvan ik veel kon en 
kan leren bijvoorbeeld om te relativeren, dingen va nuit verschillende perspectieven te 
bekijken, iets niet zomaar voor waar aan te nemen, creatieve oplossingen te bedenken en 
erop te vertrouwen dat er voor elk probleem een opl ossing te vinden is. Veel dank ook 
voor je acceptatie van mijn privéomstandigheden zoa ls de keuze van mijn woonplaats. Het 
was steeds erg leuk om met jou op congressen tussen  drie talen te switchen en om het 
ook eens over niet-werk-gerelateerde onderwerpen te  hebben. Thank you! Außerdem 
finde ich es bewundernswert wie Ihr es schafft eine  gleichberechtigte Ehe mit zwei 
Kindern und Karrieren zu führen. 
Bij de laatste fase van mijn project was Prof.dr. C ees Glas intensief betrokken. Cees, 
bedankt voor je expertise op het gebied van IRT en CAT en voor de snelle beantwoording 
van dringende vragen. 
Mart, Erik, Christina en Cees, ik verheug me erop v erder met jullie samen te werken.  
  
217 Graag wil ik ook de leden van mijn promotiecommissi e bedanken. Prof.dr. Ernst 
Bohlmeijer, Prof.dr. Joost Dekker, Prof.dr. Rinie G eenen, Prof.dr. Piet van Riel, hartelijk 
dank dat u zitting wilt nemen in mijn promotiecommi ssie. Prof.dr. Sarah Hewlett, thank 
you for coming to the Netherlands and being part of  my examination committee.  
Mijn dank gaat ook uit naar alle andere mensen die me bij de uitvoering van mijn 
onderzoek geholpen hebben. De teams van de poli reu matologie van het Medisch 
Spectrum Twente en van de ZGT Almelo/Hengelo; bedan kt voor de hulp bij het werven 
van participanten voor mijn verschillende studies. 
Ook wil ik de medewerkers van de secretariaten van de UT bedanken voor hun hulp bij 
organisatorische taken. In het bijzonder dank ik Ma rieke Smellink en Ria Stegehuis voor 
het snel en nauwkeurig regelen van allerlei secreta riële taken.  
Dr. Peter ten Klooster, bedankt dat ik altijd met v ragen over methodologische 
onderwerpen bij je binnen mocht lopen en je geduldi g al mijn vragen over Teleform hebt 
beantwoord.  
Medepromovendi Liseth Siemons en Martijn Oude Vosha ar, bedankt voor jullie hulp met 
onderwerpen rondom IRT en CAT, voor de gezelligheid  bij IRT-cursussen en in Chicago.  
Ik wil ook alle collega’s en medepromovendi van de afdeling PGT danken voor de prettige 
werksfeer en collegialiteit. Vooral dank aan Laurie n Buitinga, Martine Fledderus, Marloes 
Vermeer, Roos van der Vaart, Ingrid Nota, Sanne Lam ers, Jojanneke Korte, Saskia Kelders 
en Rilana Prenger. Het was een leuke en gezellige t ijd met jullie samen op de UT, bij P&H, 
op congressen en ook bij verschillende etentjes en feestjes.  
Martine en Laurien, mijn kamergenootjes, natuurlijk  bijzonder grote dank aan jullie. Op 
onze kamer werd hard gewerkt, maar we hebben ook ve el plezier gehad. Bijna ons gehele 
promotietraject hebben we met elkaar gedeeld. Zonde r jullie was het veel minder leuk 
geweest! Ik hoop dat we ook in de toekomst vriendin nen blijven.  
Bovendien wil ik ook nog mijn scriptie begeleiders uit Nijmegen noemen; Dr. Yolande Kuin 
en Prof.dr. Judith Prins. Jullie hebben mij na mijn  praktijkstage de mogelijkheid gegeven 
mijn scriptie in het kader van een onderzoeksstage te schrijven. Daardoor ben ik erachter 
gekomen welk werk bij mij past en wat ik na mijn st udie wilde doen. Jullie waren 
inspirerende rolmodellen voor mij en hebben voor mi j de deur naar de wereld van de 
wetenschap geopend, bedankt!   
Bedankt ook Kathrin Fuchs en Christina Pawliczek. D anke dass Ihr beiden meine 
Paranimfen sein wollt und mir an diesem besonderen Tag auf spezielle Art und Weise zur 
Seite steht. Kathrin, es ist schön dass wir schon s o viele Jahre kleine und große Ereignisse 
in unseren Leben miteinander teilen, so unterschied lich wir auch sind. Tini, seit unserer 
Studentenzeit sind mittlerweile ein paar Jahre verg angen und wir haben schon dass eine 
oder andere miteinander erlebt. Unter anderem Danke  für all die Gespräche über die 218 Arbeit unter Wissenschaftlerinnen. Aber ebenso möch te ich mich bei zwei weiteren 
Menschen bedanken: Kristina Forsmann und Carola Pol at-Tenhaft. Danke für Eure 
Freundschaft; für gute Gespräche auch mal über erns tere Themen, gemeinsame 
Unternehmungen und Euer Verständnis auch für Erzähl ungen über meinen manchmal 
nicht ganz einfach erklärbaren Beruf. Ich bin froh vier so gute Freundinnen zu haben. 
Ein besonderer Dank auch an meine „Mitsportler“ vom  Maxmove; Sabine, Michael, Dolly, 
Svetlana und Holger. Der Sport und die Geselligkeit  dabei waren in den letzten vier Jahren 
von unschätzbarem Wert für mich. Nach einem guten T raining ist jeglicher Frust über 
überfüllte Straßen wieder vergessen. Sabine und Mic hael, wer hätte gedacht dass wir mal 
in einer familiären Beziehung zueinander stehen kön nten.  
Dann möchte ich natürlich zwei besonders wichtigen Menschen danken; meinen Eltern. 
Mama und Papa die immer hinter mir stehen und an mi ch glauben, egal welche in ihren 
Augen möglichen und unmöglichen Entscheidungen ich bislang in meinem Leben getroffen 
habe. Die gebündelte Menge an Durchhaltevermögen, E hrgeiz, und Genauigkeit die ich 
von Euch mitbekommen habe konnte ich in den letzten  vier Jahren gut gebrauchen. Mir ist 
klar dass ich ohne Euch und Euren Rückhalt niemals dort wäre wo ich heute bin. Unendlich 
vielen Dank Euch beiden!   
Danke auch an die Lebenspartner meiner Eltern - Lid ia und Horst -  für das aufrichtige 
Interesse an meiner Doktorarbeit. Horst, danke für all Deine Unterstützung in den letzten 
Jahren, unter anderem beim Einrichten meiner Wohnum gebung.  
Auch meine übrige Familie war stets interessiert an  Fortschritten in meiner Arbeit. 
Nochmal zur Deutlichkeit, man bekommt in den Nieder landen keinen Doktorhut. 
Steven, auch wenn wir nur den letzten Teil meiner D oktorandenzeit zusammen verbracht 
haben möchte ich Dir für so vieles danke sagen. In erster Linie für Deine Liebe, Dein 
Vertrauen und dass Du für mich da bist. Aber auch f ür praktische Dinge wie der 
Bereitstellung eines ungestörten Heimarbeitsplatzes  und der ausgezeichneten Versorgung 
mit Kaffee und vegetarischem Essen - nicht nur in d er letzten Schreibphase. Mit Dir war es 
nicht allzu schwer den nötigen Abstand zur Arbeit z u halten und Dingen die richtige 
Relevanz zuzuordnen. Thank you just for everything – I´m very sure that someone like you 
did never happen to me before. I hope that we will follow each other and not become 
tired of our relationship at some days but that it will remain our stable guiding light.   
 
 
Stephanie Nikolaus, 
Februari 2012 
 
  
219  
 
 
 
 
Curriculum vitae 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 220 Stephanie Nikolaus werd geboren op 2 november 1980 in Kleef (Duitsland). In 2000 
behaalde zij haar “Abitur” aan het Johanna-Sebus-Gy mnasium in Kleef. Daarna werkte zij 
bij het districtsbestuur in Kleef waar zij onder an dere als administratief medewerkster bij 
de vakgroep financiën in dienst was. In 2003 begon zij met de studie psychologie aan de 
Radboud Universiteit Nijmegen. Vier jaar later rond de zij haar studie (afstudeerrichting 
psychogerontologie) met de Master of Science af en begon in november 2007 als 
promovenda op de afdeling Psychologie, Gezondheid &  Technologie van de Universiteit 
Twente. Het promotietraject “Meten van vermoeidheid  bij patiënten met reumatoïde 
artritis” werd begeleid door Dr. C. Bode, Dr. E. Ta al en Prof. Dr. M. A. F. J. van de Laar. 
Stephanie volgde het trainingsprogramma van de onde rzoeksschool Psychology & Health. 
De resultaten van haar promotieproject staan beschr even in dit proefschrift. Op het 
moment heeft Stephanie een functie als post-doc ond erzoeker bij de UT om verder te 
werken aan de ontwikkeling van een CAT voor vermoei dheid bij RA (gefinancieerd door 
het Reumafonds).  
 
 
Stephanie Nikolaus was born on November 2, 1980 in Kleve (Germany). After completing 
her secondary education in 2000, she worked at the local government in Kleve where she 
was employed as administrator at the financial depa rtment. In 2003 she started to study 
Psychology at the Radboud University Nijmegen in th e Netherlands. Four years later, she 
completed her study (psychogerontology) with the Ma ster of Science. In November 2007 
she got employed as a PhD student at the Department  of Psychology, Health & 
Technology of the University of Twente. The PhD pro ject “Measuring fatigue in patients 
with rheumatoid arthritis” was supervised by Dr. C.  Bode, Dr. E. Taal and Prof. Dr. M. A. F. 
J. van de Laar. Stephanie participated in the PhD t raining program of the Interuniversity 
Research Institute for Psychology & Health. The res ults of her PhD project are described in 
this dissertation. Currently Stephanie is appointed  as post-doc researcher at the UT to 
develop a CAT for fatigue in RA (financed by the Du tch Arthritis Foundation). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
221  
 
 
 
List of Publications 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 222 Nikolaus S, Kuin Y, Verhagen S, Prins J. Mantelzorg ers van oncologiepatiënten: ervaren 
belasting in de palliatieve fase en rouw na het ove rlijden. Gedragstherapie 
2008;41:39-50. 
 
Nikolaus S, Bode C, Taal E, van de Laar MAFJ. New I nsights into the Experience of Fatigue 
Among Patients with Rheumatoid Arthritis: A Qualita tive Study. Ann Rheum Dis 
2010;69(5):895-897.   
  
Nikolaus S, Bode C, Taal E, van de Laar MAFJ. Four different patterns of fatigue in 
rheumatoid arthritis patients: results of a Q-sort study. Rheumatology 
2010;49(11):2191-2199.  
 
Nikolaus S, Bode C, Taal E, van de Laar MAFJ. Selec tion of items for a computer-adaptive 
test to measure fatigue in patients with rheumatoid  arthritis – A Delphi 
approach. Qual Life Res. Published online 31 July 2 011. doi: 10.1007/s11136-011-
9982-8. 
 
Nikolaus S, van de Laar MAFJ. Measuring fatigue in rheumatoid arthritis. Nat Rev 
Rheumatol 2011;7(10):562-564 . doi: 10.1038/nrrheum.2011.124 
 
Nikolaus S, Bode C, Taal E, van de Laar MAFJ. Which  dimensions of fatigue should be 
measured in patients with rheumatoid arthritis? – A  Delphi study. 
Musculoskeletal Care. Published online 11 November 2011. doi: 
10.1002/msc.222. 
 
Nikolaus S, Bode C, Taal E, van de Laar MAFJ (in pr ess). Experts’ evaluations of fatigue 
questionnaires used in rheumatoid arthritis – A Del phi study among patients, 
nurses and rheumatologists in the Netherlands. Clin  Exp Rheumatol. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
223  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 224  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 This is the end of the 23 text 

