Resource

Fatigue
Fatigue is one of the most common and can be one of the most debilitating symptoms of RA. It is a
level of tiredness which cannot always be eased through getting a good night’s sleep, and it can have
a major impact on day-to-day living.
Print

Fatigue is one of the most common and can be one of the most debilitating symptoms of RA. It is a
level of tiredness which cannot always be eased through getting a good night’s sleep, and it can have
a major impact on day-to-day living.
In an NRAS survey in 2014, 89% of those surveyed said that they experienced fatigue, with 40% of

those experiencing persistent and severe fatigue.
Yet, despite it being such a common and severe symptom, we often hear some worrying things about
fatigue, such as healthcare professionals not giving it as much attention as other symptoms and
patients not knowing how best to manage their fatigue.
With this in mind, NRAS has created resources to help with fatigue, including our Fatigue Matters
booklet and interactive fatigue diary.
Pacing your activities can really help with fatigue management, but it’s not always easy. It could
involve making difficult decisions on prioritising of activities (including work) and how much to do each
day and week, as well as whether to complete an activity or spread it out over several days, and this
won’t always come naturally to people. Keeping a diary of activity levels and fatigue levels can help
you with pacing.
There are also many other strategies that can help, including a healthy diet, a good level of exercise
and getting better control of your RA overall, through a combination of medication and selfmanagement techniques.

Fatigue matters
Fatigue can have a severe impact on the quality of life of those affected and it can come on at
anytime without warning. We have created a self-help guide to explain what fatigue is, the causes and
what you can do to tackle this symptom.

Read more
Sleep
Getting a good night’s sleep can be tough, especially when you are suffering from the
symptoms of RA. We hope that this article will help to give you some tips for getting a good
night’s sleep.

This article was downloaded from www.nras.org.uk. National Rheumatoid Arthritis Society (NRAS) is a registered charity in England and
Wales (1134859) and Scotland (SC039721). A private company limited by guarantee. Registered in England and Wales (7127101).

